2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K637 School Name: ACADEMY FOR CONSERVATION AND THE ENVIRONMENT Principal: EUGENE MAZZOLA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Academy for Conservation and the Environment 331800011637 9-12 School Number (DBN): 18K637 6565 Flatlands Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11236 718-968-4101 Phone Number: Fax: 718-968-4296 Eugene M. Mazzola emazzol@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Eugene M. Mazzola Timothy Calhoun Belinda Ortiz Williams TackieaSimpson SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Belinda Ortiz Williams Kayla Williams LevinaCoke N/A Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Boulevard, Room F11 Brooklyn, New York 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-290-0690 Phone Number: 718-290-8690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Degovia Mauriciere FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, New York 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4900 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Eugene M. Mazzola TimothyCalhoun BelindaOrtizWilliams Lamar Banton N/A Kayla Williams LevinaCoke N/A Dennis Coke Clarissa Parker Patrice Judge Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Smith BahaaAboughaida TackieaSimpson Member/Parent Member/Assistant Principal Member/UFTTeacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At The Academy for Conservation and the Environment (ACE) teacher teams work diligently to plan, implement, reflect and revise instruction. Our vision, mission and instructional focus was created in conjunction with our teacher teams. ACE’s vision is: “Every Graduate will be prepared for College / Career success” Our Mission is to prepare students with the knowledge, skills, confidence, and motivation to become positive members of their community, environment, and society. Students will engage in rigorous activities that will foster college / career success through our teacher-generated ACE core beliefs of how students learn best: accountability, routines, applicable knowledge, 2018-19 CEP 9  and data driven reflective modified instruction. ACE core values this year were transformed into an acronym that describes for students what they should aspire to be: -Ambitious while exceeding expectations and persevering over adversity -Charged to take ownership of not only ourselves but those around us -Equipped with knowledge, resources, and skills needed to thrive as lifelong learners 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Instructional focus is Productive Engagement, in which teachers strategically use data to assist students in building skills for independent college / career success by actively engaging students in cognitively challenging activities that will encompass critical thinking, problem solving, student generated questions, and real world applied knowledge. Our teacher teams meet once per year to review and revise the instructional focus and make adjustments that will further driven instruction and student learning. Our school has partnerships with Cornell University, and Brooklyn College. Through Cornell University we provide a senior Hydroponics Internship class in which students are taught part time by a Cornell Professor and participate in growing various forms of vegetation within our school building using the hydroponics technology. Through Brooklyn College they provide the Talent Search and TRIO Programs that offers our students a wide range of college preparation programs from SAT Prep, counseling, and local tours of surrounding universities. This year we have established a partnership with Medgar Evers college to provide dual credit courses to our students in Global History, United States History, Biology, and English. ACE served as a New York City Teaching Academy for 2017-2018. Four regularly appointed teachers were interviewed, selected and trained as Collaborative Coaches to host a Partner Teacher in their classroom for three months each term. A school based Lead Coach was selected to facilitate professional development, conduct observations of teaching and coaching, model instructional practices, and support the professional growth of the partner teachers. Partner Teachers were evaluated by an effectiveness manager over the course of the residency in order to earn an alternative teaching license. The partnership will be continued in 2018-2019. We have a community-based organization called DayOne. DayOne is a Brooklyn-based non-profit organization. One of the programs that Day One offers our students is the Teen Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP). The goals of RAPP are: a. Prevention: increase student awareness of abusive relationship behaviors and providing the ability to develop healthy relationships. b. Intervention: increase emotional support and stability for at-risk students and those in abusive relationships. c. Teacher/School Staff Professional Development: improve the ability of teachers and other school staff to identify teen relationship abuse and make appropriate referrals to the RAPP social worker. d. Community Outreach and Parent Education: increase awareness of abusive teen relationship behaviors outside of school and the community. 2018-19 CEP 10  The time schedule of our school allows for our students to all have the same lunch period. This enables our teachers to meet daily on different teams during our common planning time. During common planning time teacher’s work on content teams, grade/inquiry teams as well as developing professional learning opportunities for all staff members. We also allocate one day a week where our students can get extra tutoring from their teachers. Our school community of 300 students is very diverse which includes 39 students that are New English Learners (ENL), and 49 students that have an Individual Education plan (IEP). Of these populations specifically the ENL students we have over 20 students that speak Arabic and 10 that speak Haitian Creole. It is a focus of our to provide support to these students so they are successful in our educational program. This year in an effort to build our school community's culture, our teacher teams developed 4 school houses and student clubs. Each student and staff member participated in one of the four houses. Each month a house event was coordinated that creted a competition among the four houses with prizes to the winning house. Teachers also developed school clubs based on student interest that met on Fridays during lunch. Over the past year our regents passing rates have dipped slightly, so regents exams will be a focus in Social studies and science. This year we will also be focusing on continuing to increase our promotion rate specifically in the 9 th grade, continuing to increase rigorous instruction that is aligned to college readiness across all grade levels, and increasing the expectations of our students in regards to their own mindsets as well as ensuing that we continue to provide a supportive environment for all our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a diverse population in terms of students that are economically disadvantaged, receive special education services and are English Language learners. These populations need to have continued support and supplemental skill development. The needs of these populations are met through the support we have dedicated to them in terms of special education teachers and ENL teachers. This year we will increase the number of professionals serving these students to ensure their needs are addressed. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Through the framework for great schools we have made gains specifically in our 11th grade 10+ credit accumulation from 70.2% to 82.5% as well as our college readiness index from 9.7% to 12.7%. This year we will continue to make gains as we focus on improving specifically rigorous instruction across grade levels and content areas. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K637 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 285 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 79.6% % Reduced Lunch 11.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 2.1% 8.8% 7.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 72% 80.6% 1.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 88 80 85.9% 2.8% 20.4% 75.8% 6.0% 2.5% 2 9% 4.3 N/A N/A 79% 77% 84.1% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school leadership team we reviewed our data regarding college readiness through the state accountability as well the college readiness index from the framework for great schools. We also examined feedback from our Principal performance observations which state specifically to continue to design lesson activities that require rigorous student thinking and application of knowledge. Our strengths are as follows: 1. Ongoing professional development around areas of need as specified by the Quality Review, Superintendent Recommendation and Summative Assessment Data such as the MOSL and Regents. 2. Graduation Rate and Credit Accumulation rate exceed comparison groups. 3. College enrollment rate percentage exceeds comparison group, borough and city. (60% 2017-2018) Priority Needs:   Increase student credit accumulation across grades 9 - 12 to exceed 85% Increase the amount of students that successfully complete college or career preparatory courses and exams. Currently 44% Improve school attendance rate. Currently 86%   Provide Professional Development to improve teacher observation ratings in 3D (Assessment) currently average 2.3. Improve the percentage of students that graduate college and career ready. Currently 44%  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through rigorous classroom activities and actionable feedback to students, there will be an increase of 6% in our 4-Year College Readiness Index students from 44% to at least 50% as measured by the New York City School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1 . Professional Development that will use teacher knowledge with shared best practices, internally and externally, to implement teaching practices that will incorporate diagnostic assessments, checks for understanding, on the spot assessment, formative assessment, periodic assessments, summative assessments, and strategies to help students use the feedback given. Specific focus will be on providing teachers with the skills necessary to assist students with using the feedback given to improve their own work. 2. Monday Professional Development sessions that will familiarize teachers with the Danielson rubric with an emphasis on what it looks like to be highly effective in 3d: Assessment. Professional development will then be differentiated for all teachers base on individual ratings. Classroom Teachers 3. Common Planning Time grade team meetings and inquiry team meetings to discuss student feedback and look at student work following feedback given. Teachers will look at strategies for giving feedback and determine where students use feedback to improve their work. These strategies will be shared across teams and grade levels. Content Leaders Grade team leaders Classroom teachers 4. All teachers will be trained on Skedula, Google Docs, and Google Domain to improve teacher academic feedback and communication with students. 5. Parents will be invited into classrooms twice per year, once in the fall and once in the spring. Parents will be given strategies to assist students in using feedback to improve their work. Parents will also be given access to Skedula so they can track their child's progress on a daily basis. Parents will be given progress reports 3 times each semester. Teachers Parents 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creative Classroom Solutions Consultants Administration Daily PD Days September 5th, 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teacher Teachers November 6th, 2018 January 28th, 2019 Weekly inter-visitations through June 2019 Every Monday September 2018 - June 2019 Every Tuesday and Wednesday September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 Content Leaders Peer Collaborative Teacher Administration Peer collaborative teacher Administration Team leaders Administration Peer Collaborative Teacher September 26th 2018 and March 7th 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 6. Through strategic lunch time academic groups such as a reading center, writing center, math resource center and student initiated enrichment, we will attempt to change student mindsets for themselves and develop high expectations for their academic career. 7. Students will be given the learning style identification survey. The first assessment will determine the student's initial preferred learning style. Teachers will conference with students individually to make them aware of their learning style and set goals. Teachers will align classroom activities with student learning styles and differentiate feedback given to students. 8. School wide planning to allow for one-on-one conferencing twice per term, 4 times for the year. Conferences will take place with grade team teachers and last 10 minutes to review feedback and develop strategies for growth. 9. Data - folios will be created for each individual student and made accessible for all teachers to use during planning and team meetings. All Teacher Teams Teachers Peer Collaborative teacher Content Leaders Principal's Cabinet Peer collaborative teacher Teachers November 2018 - May 2019 Teachers Daily September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Success Academy Teachers Administration 4 times per year Administration Teachers October 2018 - May 2019 4 times per year Grade Teams Administration Grade Teams Inquiry Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be given access to Skedula so they can monitor their child's work on a daily basis. Parents will be invited into the classrooms twice per term to review and explain the expectations and ways they can assist their child with their school work at home with an emphasis on utilizing teacher feedback. The visits will take place in September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, and May 2019. Key personnel responsible will be the coordinator of student activities, the parent coordinator, and the principal's cabinet. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Partnership with Creative Classroom Solutions that assisted teachers in aligning their unit plans with Common Core Shifts and the Danielson Rubric for Teaching through 1 full day PD in the September 2017. Creative Classroom Solutions will also provide one-on-one coaching sessions in which teachers receive feedback on rigorous instructional strategies 14 times during the school year approximately twice per month. 2018-19 CEP 15  2. Peer Collaborative Teacher will lead PD sessions once per week during Monday Professional Development that will focus on a specific strategies and techniques to drive our instructional focus and increase rigorous instruction in the classroom. This will include data analysis and implementation of the power standards. 3. Content specific teachers will provide after school professional development to focus on increasing student skills with common core aligned tasks. 4. Per session will be provided for family engagement nights, outside professional development, and curriculum design. 5. Per Session will be provided for teachers to provide additional support to students during after school and Saturday supplemental skill building instruction. 6. Special Education teachers and ENL teachers will conduct trainings for classroom teachers so that scaffolding can be provided for special education students and ELL students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November & April: - School created student survey to determine their perspective on the effectiveness of the feedback they are being given and room for improvement. A midpoint benchmark would be at least 60% of students answering positively on teacher feedback. - Power standard data analysis from data-folios in which students are making a 5% gain from baseline to January mid-term exams. January: - January Regents Data analysis will show a 5% increase from Baseline as well. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Framework for great schools, student survey report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After a close analysis of the following: - NYC surveys - Framework for Great Schools report - Attendance reports - Suspension reports We observed that as a school we need to continue to work on improving data such as classroom behavior, peer interactions, suspensions and attendance. Strengths: ● Social-emotional student support ● Personal attention and support ● Decrease in superintendent suspensions ● Attendance Team ● Guidance services Priority Needs: ● Attendance interventions to increase whole school monthly attendance - Currenlty 2017 - 2018 = 86% ● Supportive interventions for students who fall in the 70% - 79% attendance range ● Increase civil accountability for students - Through restorative justice circles 100% of students will participate in learning these skills ● Increase student involvement in school activities from 2017 - 2018 2018-19 CEP 17  ● School Moral ● Increase positive Peer Interactions and mediation through student government and student voice Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 through restorative justice practices and increased student voice through the creation of a functioning student government there will be a 5% decrease in level 4 incidents from 18 to 14 as measured by OORS. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. A content-team leader (teacher) will be added to the attendance team in order for the team to get the teachers’ perspective. The attendance team will continue to have weekly meetings to develop strategies and interventions to improve students’ attendance. During the weekly parental outreach, students who are identified by the attendance team to have poor attendance will be allocated to staff members for constant monitoring and communication with their parents. Monthly attendance incentives will be organized throughout the school year. 2. The Dean’s office will spearhead the creation of a peer mediation program in collaboration with the guidance counselor. The Dean’s office will train students to conduct peer-mediations and will supervise peer mediation sessions. 3. In Addition the deans office will create a student council that will be comprised of students from each grade level that will hear all level 1 and 2 disciplinary complaints and render a decision. 4. Throughout the school year professional development will be offered to teachers on effective classroom management strategies. This will be in the form of teachers presenting best practices, formal professional development as well as through kid-talk protocols. During our weekly learning rounds positive classroom management strategies will be highlighted and shared with other teachers. This data will be tabulated and reviewed quarterly. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who have less than 70% attendance Weekly September 2018 – June 2019 Students who are referred to the Dean’s office Daily September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal, Attendance teacher, guidance counselors, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator, School Aide, Special Education Content Team Leader Deans, guidance counselor, Teachers CoSA Students Classroom teachers Weekly September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches, Peer Collaborative Teacher, CoSA, teachers Weekly Professional Development meetings, weekly learning rounds and quarterly data reviews. 2018-19 CEP 19  5. A student government will be implemented in which all grades will be represented. Nominations will be taken, campaign speeches will be presented, and elections will be held to determine the government members Students The government members will meet to draw up a charter by which the council will be run. CoSA September 2018– June 2019 Once per week 6. The student government will function to create a stronger school identity by creating and promoting fund raisers and social activities. Students will also have the opportunity to discuss any issues they may be dealing with and propose possible solutions. Students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Students 7. The Student council / government will hold a town hall to address any issues raised by the student body; possible solutions will also be proposed Town hall notes and proposals will be presented to the principal’s cabinet for further consideration. Wednesdays and Thursdays Students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Students Wednesdays and Thursdays 8. State of the school conference: the student government will report to the student council on their progress/success throughout the school year as well as discussing potential goals for the next school year. Students January 2019 & May 2019 Faculty advisor Students 9. Students will be given the learning style identification survey. The first assessment will determine the student's initial preferred learning style. Teachers Special Education Content Leader Daily September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will conference with students individually to make them aware of their learning style and set goals. Teachers will align classroom activities with student learning styles and differentiate group roles. 10. School wide planning to allow for one on one conferencing twice per term, 4 times for the year. Teachers Conferences will take place in social studies classes and last 5-10 minutes to review learning styles and develop strategies for growth. 11. Restorative circles will be implemented with teachers to foster empathy between staff and students. Teachers Students 4 times per year. October 2018 December 2018 March 2019 May 2019 Weekly during common planning time Special Education Content Leader Deans Peer Collaborative Teacher 2018-19 CEP 20 12. Opportunities to work with students outside academics will be implemented into the common planning time schedule. Such opportunities will be mentoring, community service, young man's club, young woman's club internships, resume building, college application assistance. Teachers Students Weekly during common planning time CoSA Peer Collaborative Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about student attendance daily through Blackboard connect as well as Skedula. Parents will be informed about the student government during the fall back to school night. Letters will be mailed home to explain the structure of the student council. Each month at PTA / SLT meetings the student government representatives will update parents on their progress. The personnel responsible for this task will be the principal's cabinet and the coordinator of student activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Attendance Team training after school in the Fall 2018 2. Peer-mediation and conflict resolution training and workshops 3. Professional Development for teachers on effectively executing the after school parent-outreach student groups in the Fall 2018 4. Classroom management training and workshops by Creative Classroom Solutions 5. Dean budget allowance 6. Per session for the dean to train student council members on hearing level 1 and 2 infractions. 7. Per session for after school student council meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Monthly Peer Mediation data. Showing number of students in mediation and a decrease in incidents. 2. Monthly data of incidents and suspensions from OORS 2018-19 CEP 21  3. Monthly student council meeting minutes. Mid-point benchmarks will be:  no more that 7 level 4 incidents reported by January 2019.  Increase by 10% student requested mediation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports from 2017 / 2018 to 2018 / 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a cabinet we reviewed the data from the NYC School Quality Guide from the past three school years, 2015-2016, 2016 – 2017 and 2017-2018 school scholarship reports, and student transcripts. We also reviewed our data regarding observations through the advance system, as well as staff feedback to professional development sessions and informal conversations. We also examined feedback from our last Quality Review and Principal performance observations which state specifically to continue to reinforce units of study that are aligned to the common core learning standards and design lesson activities that require rigorous students thinking and application of knowledge. Our strengths are as follows: ● Strong teacher teams ● Content specialists ● Allotted time for co-planning instruction. ● Peer feedback Priority Needs: ● Increased performance in student to student interaction and learning. ● Increased critical thinking skills though activities that are at least at Webb's Depth of Knowledge level 3 or 4 ● Credit accumulation for students in the 11th grade ● Increase the Regents completion rate for students in Cohort U Special Education Graduation rate = 65%   ELL Graduation Rate = 50%  Economically disadvantaged Graduation Rate = 80% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 23  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August 2019, through teacher collaborative team work in professional learning communities with a focus on special populations, all students, including students with disabilities and ELLs will make progress toward graduation as evidence by a 5% overall increase in graduation rate from 81% to 85% as measured by the New York City School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Implementation of Cross curricular planning and instruction during CPT, grade team meetings, and content meetings. Teachers will align teaching of skills that can be applied across contents in which they will create turn and talk rubrics to implement in all ACE classes/aligning rubrics between contents. Teachers Students September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal, Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals and parent coordinator Content leaders Administration English Content team English Content Team Teachers Teachers students Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Students who received less than 75 on the ELA Regents and less than 80 on the Math Regents All students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Content Team Leaders, Classroom teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal, Content Team Leaders, APEX Coordinator ELL Teacher Classroom Teachers 2. Implementation of individual common planning time schedules to allow more collaboration between ENL and special education teachers. 3. Implementation of a writing workshop in all content areas where teachers of different content areas will work together to tutor students after school. 4. Use of Google docs to concurrently track student progress through weekly team meeting and student talk protocols across content teams. Teacher team building exercises to foster collaboration will be implemented as well. 5. Students who receive less than 75 on the ELA Regents, less than 80 on the Integrated Algebra Regents or less than a 70 on the Common Core Algebra Regents will get additional Regents prep and will be given an opportunity to re-take these exams in order to get college-readiness scores. 6. Through the use of purposeful programming students will have the opportunity to receive tutoring in all subjects once a week during their lunch period. All teachers will hold tutoring sessions during student lunch period in their respective subject area. Teachers will be given the opportunity to invite students to tutoring as an anecdotal to classroom performance. 7. Students will have the opportunity to receive tutoring in all subjects Wednesday through Friday every week. Tutoring sessions will be held in the major subject areas. School administration and teachers will focus on students in Cohort T who are struggling in their respective subjects and Regents. 2018-19 CEP 25  Teachers will be given the opportunity to invite other students to their sessions as they see fit, and may make it mandatory for students with parent permission. 8. Through the use of the APEX online learning system, students in the lowest third and Cohort S students that are in need of credits to graduate will have the opportunity to receive credit bearing as well as credit recovery (where applicable) in classes in which they were not previously successful in previous semesters. 9. Scholarship data will be made readily available to all teachers immediately following the end of each marking period so that teachers can focus on each student individually who was not successful. 10. All ELL designated students will be offered extended time after school for literary work as well as completion of exams and assignments. 11. All ELL designated students will be offered zero period, After school and Saturday tutoring in English. 12. Through a partnership with Medgar Evers College we will offer 5 classes where students will have the opportunity to earn up to 3 college credits from Medgar Evers college. 13. During Common Planning Time teacher teams will review school data to determine the focus with credits and regents exams. 14. Through teacher collaborative content teams an intense regent’s preparation schedule will be developed in which administration will create a master schedule that incorporates skill -based courses designed to increase performance on the regent’s exams. 15. Teacher collaborative teams will implement common unit assessments, mock regents and final exams during each semester that are aligned to the regents exams. This will expose the students to the time and content knowledge needed to be successful as well as prepare them for taking such a high stakes exam. 16. Use of the learning styles survey to assist teachers with planning and differentiating task for students in Saturday regents preparation classes. September 2018 – August 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teacher, Content Team Leaders and classroom teachers All students especially students in need of credit accumulation and passing Regents 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A senior parent meeting will be held in the fall 2018 and in January of 2019 to review requirements for graduation and discuss calendar of support for their child. Key personnel will be the Principal's cabinet. Specific populations will also have additional parent meetings with additional support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per session for teachers and administration for Regents Prep 2. Per session for APEX Coordinator. 3. The creation of at least one course during the regular school day in each subject area that is devoted to improving skills in that content area. 4. Partnership with Medgar Evers College to offer college courses. Teachers will be given per session and training rate to assist in implementing these high level courses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each marking period (6 in total), periodic data analysis on credit accumulation. Regents data analysis in January and June 2019. Midpoint data will show: at least 75% of Cohort U will be on track toward graduation with credits and regents by January 2019. at least 70% of Special education students will be on track with credits and regents exams by January 2019 at least 55% of ELL students will be on track with credits and regents exams by January 2019     At least 80% of economically disadvantaged students will be on track toward graduation with credits and regents exams by January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 27  Cohort U Graduation Rate Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school leadership team we reviewed our data regarding observations through the advance system, as well as staff feedback to professional development sessions and informal conversations. We also examined feedback from our last Quality Review and Principal performance observations which state specifically to continue to reinforce units of study that are aligned to the State standards and design lesson activities that require rigorous students thinking and application of knowledge. Our strengths are as follows: ● Strong teacher teams ● Classroom engagement ● Peer feedback ● Student engagement Priority Needs: ● Increased performance in Classroom discussion. ● Increased performance in student to student learning ● Increased critical thinking skills though activities that are at least a Webb's Depth of Knowledge level 3 or higher.  Specifically from 2017 - 2018 we will need to improve Global History (49% passing ) and Algebra I (50% passing). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June 2019, through strategic planning and use of resources there will be an increase of 5% passing of students achieving a 65 or higher on all regents exams as measured by the ATS REDS report. 2018-19 CEP 30 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Students Parents Supporting Staff Weekly and bi-weekly beginning September, 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Team Leaders Student Council PTA Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. Inclusive Leadership: - the decision -making process (especially as it relates to instruction) and is communicated to all stakeholders Teachers:  Administration will attend different weekly team meetings to provide support to team leaders  Team leaders will meet with Administration bi-weekly and use a protocol of 1 noticing and 1 improvement  Administration takes findings to Cabinet and then to SLT before a decision is made Students:  Each grade level select 2 representatives to represent their grade on the Student Council . The Student Council meets weekly to address concerns from their grades. Students will participate in a monthly focus group where a discussion around the instructional strategies they experience in their classes. This is in an effort to assess whether the weekly Teacher Professional Development is visible and communicated to the students in the classroom. Student Council meets bi-weekly with Administration and use a protocol of 1 noticing and 1 improvement    Administration takes findings to Cabinet and SLT before a decision is made. Parents:  Administration attends monthly PTA meetings and makes note of 1 noticing and 1 improvement from the parents.  Administration takes findings to Cabinet and SLT before a decision is made Supporting Staff and CBO: 2018-19 CEP 31 Principal Assistant Principals Peer Collaborative Teacher Team Leaders Teachers Teachers Students IPC: September, 2018 Weekly beginning September 27, 2018 - May 2019  Monthly meeting with Administration and gives 1 suggestion and 1 improvement  Administration takes findings to Cabinet and SLT 2. Instructional Leadership:  In an effort to include teachers' input in the instructional needs of the school and professional development, teachers will be surveyed during their Initial Planning Conference (IPC) and a series of thematic Professional Development sessions will be implemented.  Content Team Leaders will attend monthly Lead Teacher development sessions and turn key best practices to the rest of the teaching staff.  Where applicable, teachers and other staff members  will be presenters In an effort to get teachers familiar with the Danielson Rubric and to ensure reflection on their own practice, teachers will use various components of the rubric when conducting the weekly Learning Rounds among their peers.  Teachers will analyze various school data (credits, Regents, attendance, assessments, etc) in grade and content teams to discover trends and patterns following by a creating of next steps and a system of monitoring progress.  Administration will make it available for teachers to  visit best practices in other school buildings in an effort to acquire the "know-how" skills to increase student achievement. In an effort to ensure that strategies covered during professional development are visible in the classroom by students, we will conduct student focus groups bi-weekly where students will be engaged in a discussion about the instructional strategies that are visible in their classes. Teachers will then compare students' views / comments to the topics explored during the professional developments. 3. Math content team will report to cabinet on instructional inquiry findings on a monthly basis. Teachers Teachers 4. Students will be given the learning style identification survey. The first assessment will determine the student's initial preferred learning style. Teachers will conference with students individually to make them aware of their learning style and set goals. Teachers will align classroom activities with student learning styles and differentiate group roles. Content leaders. Math Content Leader September 2018 - June 2019 Daily September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 CEP 32 5. School wide planning to allow for one on one conferencing twice per term, 4 times for the year. Conferences will take place in social studies classes and last 5-10 minutes to review learning styles and develop strategies for growth. Math Teachers 4 times per year. Assistant Principal Math Content Leader October 2018 December 2018 March 2019 May 2019 6. Data - folios will be created for each individual student and made accessible for all teachers to use during planning. 7. All students who still need to pass the common Core Algebra regents will be mandated to attend Saturday Regents Prep classes through strong Parent outreach. Administration 4 Times per Administration Math Teachers year November 2018 - January 2019 & March 2019 - June 2019 Math Content Leader Assistant Principal Math Content Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Skedula updates and Blackboard connect phone messages. Key personnel will be the technology team, attendance team and all teachers through the strategic use of the parent outreach time on Tuesday afternoons. We will engage in parent meetings 3 times per semester starting with our back to school BBQ. Parents will be invited to curriculum nights and classroom visits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Partnership with Creative Classroom Solutions that assisted teachers in aligning their unit plans with Common Core Shifts and the Danielson Rubric for Teaching through 1 full day PD in the Summer 2017. Creative Classroom Solutions will also provide one-on-one coaching sessions in which teachers receive feedback on rigorous instructional strategies 10 times during the school year approximately twice per month. 2. Peer Collaborative Teacher will lead PD sessions once per week during Monday Professional Development that will focus on a specific strategies and techniques to drive our instructional focus and increase rigorous instruction in the classroom. This will include strategies to increase the teacher’s performance in domain 3 of the Danielson rubric as well as a norming of effective instruction in these areas. 3. Per session will be provided for family engagement nights, outside professional development, and curriculum design. 2018-19 CEP 33  4. Special Education teachers will conduct trainings for classroom teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Periodic data analysis based on common unit assessments and power standards. Including the data analysis of Mock regents exams in January. A mid point benchmark will be at least a 3% increase on student passing January 2019 regents exams, as compared to January 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock regents exams and regents exams in January and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strength is in parent involvement within the school and the work of our parent coordinator to increase the number of parents that are in regular contact with our school and the community. Our priority need is to further build on our outreach to parents and parent events at our school. This can be seen in our NYC School survey where we scored 90 % positive responses which was only 3% above the citywide average. We feel we can have positive gains in this area by focusing on community outreach through staff and parent support for after school programs. We will focus on connecting parents with the curriculum in living environment so that they are able to assist their child with being successful on the living environment regents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through strategic community outreach and strong family-community events there will be and increase by 5% from 84% to 89% of parents who report their is an opportunity to participate in school based events/activities as measured by the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 35 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and families Daily Principal Students 9th Grade Students Monthly Assistant Principal Sep 2018 December, 2018 Monthly Monthly Parent Coordinator Community Associate Teachers Yearly (May 2019) PTA Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. Welcoming Environment: a) The Administration and staff will continue to have an open door policy for parents to feel free and comfortable to enter the building to discuss any of their concerns. The Parent Coordinator will meet the parents at the front desk and welcome them into the building. b) Many of our parents are working, single parent families and they have indicated that they are unable to attend parent- related events or school-community activities due to a lack of child care. In an effort to ensure that parents are free to attend school events such as PTA meetings and other school activities, a group of dedicated staff members assisted by some students will engage the young children in an arts, craft, Literacy or Math program while their parents attend these meetings or events. c) In an effort to welcome our new and returning families to another school year, our Back-To-School Night will take the form of a Back-To-School BBQ. The night will be set up as an informal dinner and greet with the staff. Parents and their families will be free to partake in the BBQ while they sit and have a conversation with their child's teachers about the curriculum, expectations, assessments and college readiness. d) The staff will engage students and their families at a Holiday Family Arts and Craft Night during the Holiday Season. Parents, their children will have a fun-filled night of games, arts, crafts and making ornaments alongside our staff members. This will give parents and students to have a social interaction with the school's staff as well as to get into the holiday spirit with food and games. e) Parents will be encouraged to contribute at least one hour of 2018-19 CEP 36  their time to volunteer to the school, to assist in attendance outreach, hallway monitoring or mentoring. f) The parent coordinator will distribute a monthly parent newsletter to inform parents and families about the events happening at the school as well as other important information and notifications. g) Parents of 9th graders who excel academically will be invited to a "Breakfast with the Principal" to celebrate their children's accomplishment during the first year of High School. 2. Community Resources: a) The school will partner with the local NYC identification office to assist parents and families in getting a State ID, especially parents and students who may be undocumented. b) Through the collaboration with the PTA, teachers will provide resume writing workshops to parents and students who may be in search of employment. c) Through our Saturday School Program teachers will offer ESL classes to parents who are new immigrants. Other courses offered to parents will include Computer Literacy and Basic Math. These courses will not only assist the parents to advance themselves but may also equip them to assist their children with their assignments. d) Through community partnership with businesses in the community such as banks, nursing homes, local stores and restaurants, we will give our families an opportunity to acquire jobs by hosting a job fair. e) We will survey our parents and use their expertise to host a career day for our students. We will also invite other professional members of the community to present at the Career Day. f) Through a partnership with DMV, we will offer computer-based driver's education classes to our upperclassmen followed by the drivers written test to get a driver's permit. g) Through a partnership with a neighboring Middle School, Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy (18K763), some of Parents Weekly Principal Students November, 2018 November, 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Community Associate March, 2019 May, 2019 Teachers PTA Weekly beginning December 2017 Weekly beginning October 2018 2018-19 CEP 37  our students will be peer tutors in the after school homework help program at the Middle School. 3. Partnerships with Local Colleges / Universities: a) Through our partnership with Medgar Evers College, our students will have an opportunity to earn college credits through the Medgar Evers Dual College Program. Students take courses in English, Social Studies, Science and Math and will earn a college credit if they receive a grade of 80 or higher. b) We will continue our partnership with Cornell University to expand our Hydroponics course where students are actively engaged in growing herbs and vegetables organically in our laboratory. c) Through our partnership with the AP Expansion Program / AP For All , our students will have an opportunity to earn college credits by taking Advanced Placement courses followed by the AP exam. The AP courses offered include: English Language Composition, English Literature, Calculus and US History. 4. Students will be given the learning style identification survey. The first assessment will determine the student's initial preferred learning style. Teachers will conference with students individually to make them aware of their learning style and set goals. Teachers will align classroom activities with student learning styles and differentiate group roles. Teachers will communicate these styles and goals with parents. 5. School wide planning to allow for one on one conferencing twice per term, 4 times for the year. Conferences will take place in social studies classes and last 5-10 minutes to review learning styles and develop strategies for growth. Students Daily beginning September 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Science Teachers Daily September 2018 - June 2019 Content Leaders Administration 4 times per year. Administration Content Leaders Science Teachers October 2018 Dec-18 Mar-19 2018-19 CEP 38 6. Data - folios will be created for each individual student and parent will have access to and made accessible for all teachers to use during planning. Administration 4 times per year Administration Content Leaders Science Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A We do not have any CBO's that work specifically with family engagement in relation to this goal. However partnerships that support this goal are: Cornell University Medgar Evers Collge Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Modification of Parent Coordinator schedule to include family nights and after school programs Parent Coordinator overtime for Saturday Parent workshops. Per session for Regents prep after school and on Saturdays Per session for staff to supervise Middle School 18K763 community partnership. Per session for after school and Saturday family nights. Per session for literacy, math, arts and crafts program. Allocation for parent and student refreshments during family nights Partnership with Medgar Evers College and the AP expansion program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent attendance at events 2018-19 CEP 39  In-house school parent surveys will show an 87% positive response to school events during the first semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house parent surveys. Learning Environment Survey Students Perception Survey School Quality Guide Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Tutoring / Regents Prep: - Regents prep / tutoringon Saturdays andafter school for all students including ENL students and students with disabilities. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring / Regents Prep: -Lunch, after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Delivery: - one-to-one -small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) These services are provided during: - Zero period - during the school day in all classes - whole class activities - at lunch time once a week - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students - on-line and blended learning - After school Mondays – Thursdays - Every Saturday for 4 hours - At home using our online learning, APEX Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - content-specific vocabulary supportto ENL students to increase Regents passing rates. Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - Mandatory zero period for ENL students who were unsuccessful on ELA Regents. Modified Assessments: - This is done on a case-by-case basis. - Individual student conferencing to explore possibilities of modified assessment. Technology: - increase use of technology to motivate studentsto writing essays. - Interactive lessons Strategies: test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions andthink-pair-share,. Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. 2018-19 CEP 41  Empowerment: Technology: -Authentic tasks with real world connections . - laptopsfor students. Teacher Consultation: - Data collected from the inquiry grade teams. Student Conference: - Data from progressreports and report cards - Smart boards with interactive software in every classroom. Empowerment: - Differentiated student choice on project topics. On-line Learning - APEX: - Analysis of students’ transcripts revealed that some students need a credit recovery program. Mathematics Tutoring / Regents Prep: Teacher Consultation: - Teacher conferences with individual students to create intervention plans and action steps. Student Conference: - Teachers meet with students to discuss their progress and often make a contract to help students get on track. On-line Learning - APEX: - Online learning which includes reading, essay writing, assessments and Regents Prep skills. Tutoring / Regents Prep: The delivery methods include: These services are provided during: 2018-19 CEP 42 -Lunch, after school and Saturday - one-to-one  - Regents prep / tutoringon Saturdays andafter school for all student subgroups. Regents Prep / tutoring. - small group activities and tutoring - during the school day in all classes - pairs of students - whole class activities - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students - Online Learning - at lunch time once a week - After school Mondays – Thursdays - Every Saturday for 4 hours - At home using our online learning, APEX Modified Assessments: - This is done on a case-by-case basis. - Individual student conferencing to explore possibilities of modified assessment. Technology: -Increased use of technology(MathApplications). Strategies: test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions andthink-pair-share,. Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Empowerment: Technology: - Authentic tasks with real world connections . - laptopsfor students. Teacher Consultation: - Data collected from the inquiry grade teams. Student Conference: - Data from progressreports and report cards - Smart boards with interactive software in every classroom. Empowerment: - Differentiated student choice on project topics. On-line Learning - APEX: - Analysis of students’ transcripts revealed that some students need a credit recovery program. Teacher Consultation: - Teacher conferences with individual students to create intervention plans and action steps. Student Conference: - Teachers meet with students to 2018-19 CEP 43  discuss their progress and often make a contract to help students get on track. On-line Learning - APEX: - Online learning which includes reading, essay writing, assessments and Regents Prep skills. Tutoring / Regents Prep: -Lunch, after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. Science Tutoring / Regents Prep: - Regents prep / tutoringon Saturdays andafter school for all student subgroups. Modified Assessments: - This is done on a case-by-case basis. - Individual student conferencing to explore possibilities of modified assessment. Technology: Strategies: test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions andthink-pair-share,. Modified Assessments: The delivery methods include: - one-to-one - small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students - whole class activities - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students -Increased use of technology. - Online Learning These services are provided during: - during the school day in all classes - at lunch time once a week - After school Mondays – Thursdays - Every Saturday for 4 hours - At home using our online learning, APEX Empowerment: - Authentic tasks with real world connections . Teacher Consultation: - Data collected from the inquiry grade teams. Student Conference: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Technology: - laptopsfor students. - Smart boards with interactive software in every classroom. 2018-19 CEP 44  - Data from progressreports and report cards On-line Learning - APEX: - Analysis of students’ transcripts revealed that some students need a credit recovery program. Empowerment: - Differentiated student choice on project topics. Teacher Consultation: - Teacher conferences with individual students to create intervention plans and action steps. Student Conference: - Teachers meet with students to discuss their progress and often make a contract to help students get on track. On-line Learning - APEX: - Online learning which includes reading, essay writing, assessments and Regents Prep skills. 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies Additional Skills-based Social Studies Class: - Regents data - Data fromfinals and Mock Regents Accelerated Global Studies Program : - Regents data Tutoring / Regents Prep: - Regents prep / tutoringon Saturdays andafter school for all student subgroups. Modified Assessments: - This is done on a case-by-case basis. - Individual student conferencing to explore possibilities of modified assessment. Technology: -Increased use of technology. Empowerment: - Authentic tasks with real world connections . Teacher Consultation: Additional Skills-based Social Studies Class: - Skills-based Social Studies classes Accelerated Global Studies Program : The delivery methods include: - one-to-one - small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students - a one-year Global studies program for 10th graders. - whole class activities - Teacher-created Regents Prep packets comprising of past Regents exams and exercises . - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students - Online Learning Tutoring / Regents Prep: These services are provided during: - during the school day in all classes - at lunch time once a week - After school Mondays – Thursdays - Every Saturday for 4 hours - At home using our online learning, APEX - Regents prep / tutoringon Saturdays andafter school for all student subgroups. Modified Assessments: - This is done on a case-by-case basis. - Individual student conferencing to explore possibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  - Data collected from the inquiry grade teams. of modified assessment. Student Conference: Technology: - Data from progressreports and report cards -Increased use of technology. On-line Learning - APEX: Empowerment: - Analysis of students’ transcripts revealed that some students need a credit recovery program. - Authentic tasks with real world connections . Teacher Consultation: - Data collected from the inquiry grade teams. Student Conference: - Data from progressreports and report cards On-line Learning - APEX: - Analysis of students’ transcripts revealed that some students need a credit recovery program. Supportive Services for ENL students: - Translated exams for ENL’s to use as a reference - Pair former ENL’s with an ENL to assist with translations. - The ENL teacher pushes-in to various classes to provide 2018-19 CEP 47 The delivery methods include: These services are provided during: - one-to-one counseling - small group counseling - pairs of students - during the school day during Advisory classes - at lunch time - After school clubs and small groups Mondays – Fridays - PTA meetings At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student Counseling: - Referrals from teachers, deans and administrations. - Referrals from the attendance team. - parents’ requests - Referrals from the special education team. - students’ requests additional support to ENL students. Student Counseling: The Guidance Counselor adheres to the following protocol: - Individual target goals are developed with each student. - Weekly individual / group counseling for students. - whole class activities - Goals for each counseling group. - Progress monitoring of goals and appropriate modifications where necessary. - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students - Students and their parents/family Psychologist: responsible for: - Family workshops - Administering mandated psychological tests . - Updates and documentation of all psychological tests on SESIS. - Educational Conference with the parents to discuss the results of psychological tests / recommendations. Social Worker : - (DAYONE) Teen Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP). 2018-19 CEP 48  - emotional support and stability for at-risk students and those in abusive relationships. - Teacher/School Staff Professional Development. - Community Outreach and Parent Education. Individual counseling/Crisis counseling: - one-on-one counseling . - Group counseling - support for students who are in or have experienced abusive relationships, or teen dating violence. - Teacher and Staff training - Workshops for parents& PTA to again promote awareness of teen relationship violence. 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. We will purchase school supplies for all STH students, including book bags, notebooks, pens, pencils, calculator, ruler, dictionaries, ext. 2. We will purchase winter coats for students as needed 3. We will hold a Holiday Luncheon for the students before the Winter Break 4. Students will be provided with school supplies throughout the year Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 50  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 51  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to ensure that we attract highly qualified teachers and staff members at ACE: o Administrative team regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. o The school administration works closely with the network human resources point person to ensure that non-highly qualified teachers meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. o Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers as well as teachers in their first year of teaching. Strategies for Recruitment : We have a hiring committee that is made up of our Content Team Leaders. When hiring teaching staff, the content leader of the department first conducts a preliminary telephone interview with the applicant, followed by a face-to-face interview with the hiring committee. Once the applicant has successfully completed this interview, a demo lesson is scheduled for the applicant where the Administrative team joins the hiring committee. If the demo lesson was deemed effective by the committee, the applicant is scheduled to be interviewed by the Administrative team. Retention and Assignments : All teachers are programmed to teach in their license area and are encouraged to develop elective classes in their content area. Prior to programming, teachers complete a preference sheet which states their grade and course of preference. 97% of our teachers are programmed for their first preference course and grade. We introduce electives each semester based on teachers’ interest s and talents. For example, this year we introduced a series of new courses such as Hydroponics Science Internship in collaboration with the Environmental Science Center and Cornell University, History Through Film, History and Sports, AP English, Calculus, US History, Environmental Science, and AP English Composition. ACE staff members are encouraged to form clubs and small groups afterschool, some of the clubs we have at ACE includes: Caribbean, Cooking, Fitness, Running, Soccer, Chorus, Sustainability, Environmental, Chess and Peer Mediation. 2018-19 CEP 52  Support : Staff members are encouraged to attend all staff development opportunities provided by our Peer Collaborative Teacher. These include monthly professional developments for Principals, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinators and other professional development opportunities for teachers and paraprofessionals. Content-based professional developments are also offered to teachers within their content areas in collaboration with DOE partnerships and community-based organizations. For example, professional developments for Health and Physical Education teachers, Art teachers, Science teachers, Math teachers and the College Advisor. These consistent professional development opportunities empower our staff to be well equipped to assist our students as well as ensure that they are continually striving towards becoming highly qualified in their respective field. All first and second year teachers are assigned a mentor and meets with our Peer Collaborative Teacher weekly to discuss pedagogy and strategies to ensure that they are successful. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to improve student engagement across classrooms, a system of differentiated professional development was implemented in order to develop teacher capacity to implement strategies for productive engagement, and will result in an increase in overall teacher performance on Danielson component 3c.  Our Instructional focus (Productive Engagement) is collaboratively reviewed and revised during our Summer Institute  The Peer Collaborative teacher conducts full-staff PD, with topics focused on developing teacher capacity around productive engagement strategies  An outside agency, Creative Classroom Solutions, leads full-day professional developments throughout the year to provide teachers with PD around designing CCLS aligned unit plans and performance tasks. In addition to providing whole staff professional development, the coaches from Creative Classroom Solutions conduct classroom visits then provide targeted individualized professional development to teachers.  Math content leader observes teachers and gives them feedback on their practice and works with math department to give them feedback on their curriculum and develop strategies to support CCLS aligned math instruction (with a focus on productive engagement and the instructional shifts)  Peer Collaborative teacher meets with new teachers twice a week during their prep periods to discuss challenges, give them feedback on their instruction, debrief inter-visitations (where they visited his classroom) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 53  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At ACE our teachers are an integral part of the decision making process. Teachers meet in content and grade/inquiry teams weekly to discuss a variety of topics including assessments, analysis of data and strategies to improve instruction. The administrative team meets with the inquiry team leaders bi-weekly and the content team leaders weekly. Ultimately, these teacher leaders form the Principal’s Instructional Cabinet and all decisions are first discussed at the weekly Cabinet meeting. Teacher teams engage in implementing and analyzing common core aligned unit plans with Level 3 or 4 tasks as measured by Webb's depth of knowledge that culminate in a performance based assessment resulting in 50% of teachers being rated ‘Effective’ in component 3d using assessment in instruction. The process by which this decision was made is as follows: ● In August, at a 3 day Summer Institute teachers analyzed school data and developed action steps to make improvements in Regents scores and graduation rates ● During Common planning time, weekly PD has centered around how to make the instructional shifts ● Creative Classroom Solutions will lead full-day PDs throughout the year to provide teachers with PD around designing CCLS aligned unit plans and performance tasks ● Teachers are working on a curriculum overview tool where grade teams can see how curriculum is aligned horizontally ● Content teams meet Tuesdays during common planning time 2018-19 CEP 54  ● The instructional cabinet developed a common protocol for content teams to use when creating and looking at unit plans ● The teachers decided on a UBD structure and template for curriculum planning ● Content teams review unit plans ● Content teams analyze performance based assessments aligned to units ● The Content team leaders collect curriculum maps and provide feedback on their alignment to the CCLS During weekly instructional cabinet meeting time, the instructional cabinet use the ACE teacher designed Unit Plan Guide to give feedback to their teachers on unit plans. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 200,997.00 0 12,366 0 2,187,638.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 55 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D ,& 5EAction plans Section 5C & 5EAction Plan Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, & 5EAction plans  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 56   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 57  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Academy for Conservation and the Environment, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Academy for Conservation and the Environment will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials to support parents when helping their child with assignments ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to instill study habits with their child; ● The Parent Coordinator will foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by the frequent mailings of progress reports and report cards; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● Providing parents access to their child’s grades on a regular basis through parent access to the Jupiter grades grading system. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities, in languages that parents can understand through our ACE Website, www.acebrooklyn.org and out telephone calling system Global Connect; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Through the School Leadership Team, our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our ACE School Leadership Team will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 59  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, in the morning, afternoon and on Saturdays, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Parent “Back to School Night” to allow parents to meet their child’s teacher and get information that will assist them in helping their child in their respective subjects; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter and web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences\ Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our ACE School Leadership Team will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 60  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, in the morning, afternoon and on Saturdays, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Parent “Back to School Night” to allow parents to meet their child’s teacher and get information that will assist them in helping their child in their respective subjects; BY: Parental Involvement and School Quality Providing materials to support parents when helping their child with assignments ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to instill study habits with their child; ● The Parent Coordinator will foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by the frequent mailings of progress reports and report cards; ● Providing parents access to their child’s grades on a regular basis through parent access to the Jupiter grades grading system. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities, in languages that parents can understand through our ACE Website, www.acebrooklyn.org and out telephone calling system Global Connect; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 61   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter and web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. ACE School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy for Conservation and the Environment, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 62  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand through our Telephone messaging system, the mail and our website, www.acebrooklyn.org ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 63  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 64  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand through our Telephone messaging system, the mail and our website, www.acebrooklyn.org ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 65  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conference Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 66  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 67  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At the Academy for Conservation and the Environment (ACE), we currently have 33 ENL students according to the following: Entering: 7 students - (4 ninth graders, 1 eleventh grader and 2 tenth grader) Emerging: 10 students - (3 ninth graders, 4 tenth graders, 3 eleventh graders ) Transitioning: 8 students - (2 ninth graders, 1 tenth grader and 5 eleventh graders) Expanding: 9 students - (4 ninth graders, 3 tenth graders and 2 eleventh graders) Throughout the year we review and analyze a variety of data, including but not limited to the following: - ATS reports: RLCB, RLER, RNMR, RLAB, RHLA, RLBB, HIBE, RELL -EDAT - Scholarship Reports - Transcript evaluations Based on the RHLA report (Home Language Aggregation), the total number of students based on languages are: Arabic - 9 Bengali - 1 French - 3 French Haitian-Creole - 5 Haitian-Creole - 9 Spanish - 2 Urdu - 3 Russian - 1 Yoruba - 1 See the Home language per grade breakdown below: Language Gr. 9 Gr. 10 Gr. 11 Gr. 12 Total Arabic 2 4 3 0 9 Bengali 0 1 0 2018-19 CEP 69  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 0 1 French 0 3 0 0 3 French Hatian-Creole 2 1 2 0 5 Haitian Creole 4 1 4 0 9 Spanish 2 0 0 0 2 Urdu 2 0 1 3 Yoruba 0 0 1 0 1 Russian 1 0 0 0 1 At ACE all class periods are 42 minutes long and students have a total of 8 periods each day. Classes are held Monday - Friday 8:05am - 2:25pm. Students are programmed based on their levels and the requirements outlined in CR Part 154. Entering students receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week, while transitioning and expanding receive 180 minutes per week. Beyond this, ACE provides our ENL 2018-19 CEP 70  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information students with before and after-school tutoring and Saturday Academy made possible through Title III funding. Both certified ENL teachers work from the Title III budget before and after-school and during Saturday Academy. They also work with the students during the regular school day. We provide our ENL students with a vast range of home language support including but not limited to the following: - Glossaries in all content areas - Bilingual Dictionaries -Tablets - Teachers and other staff members who speak the home language (Bengali, Urdu, Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, Spanish, Yoruba, Czechoslovakian, Persian) assist in providing home language support to ENL students in all the ENL subgroups and grade level as listed above. - Online translation services (Google translate, Rosetta Stone) - Content area textbooks translations in the native language for students to use in class and at home -Literary text translations where applicable All ACE teachers including our ENL teachers create their own content materials based on different Professional Developments (Q-Tel for ELA, History, Science, Math) and working with an ENL coach from Generations Ready. ENL teachers also use reseources from Standford University's Understanding Language Units, Khan Academy, videos, online images, teacher tube videos and other online resources to use on a daily basis during direct instruction. In addition, the ENL teachers also use a variety of supplemented materials in the program such as the following: - Student Phonics Kit with Student Workbook - Phonics Blitz (Publisher: Really Great Reading) - Ventures 1 - 4 Student book and Workbook 2nd Edition (Publisher: Cambridge University Press) - ENL Grammar Intermediate and Advanced Workbook (Publisher: Research and Education Association) - ENL Writing Intermediate and Advanced (Publisher: Research and Education Association) - English Grammar for ESL Learners 2nd Edition (Publisher: McGraw Hill) - CSR Classroom Resources Collaborative Strategic Reading (English and Spanish) (Publisher: CSR Colorado) These resources will be used in the Before and After-school tutoring and Saturday Academy. During daily instruction during regular school days consist of students engaged in a variety of activities that are geared to increase and foster the learning of the English Language, these activities include but are not limited to the following: - Gallery walks - Expert Groups - Circle Chats - Fish Bowls - 4- Corners - Think-Pair Share - Annotations - Learning Stations - Popcorn" Activities -Literature Circles -Socratic Seminars Title III is important because it helps support our ENL students outside of the regular schools day, before and after-school as well as on weekends. We give our students each and every opportunity to get additional support by providing programs before and after school and 2018-19 CEP 71  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information during Saturday Academy. In the Before and After School programs, students meet with the ENL teachers for at least one hour. The ENL teachers use various resources such as Laptops with Language programs (Rosetta Stone, etc), leveled text, dictionaries, glossaries, etc. to assist students in understanding academic language and vocabulary in their core content areas. In addition, the ENL teachers obtain assignments from the content teachers which they scaffold and differentiate for the ENL students. The Before and After School Program is scheduled to begin in October 2018 and continue until June 2019. Saturday Academy will be held every Saturday (except during holidays). The language of instruction is English and both of our ENL teachers will work with our ENL population. The Saturday Academy runs from 8 am to 12 pm. Students from the school can come to get tutoring for content areas. Content teachers work with students. Through Title III, the ENL teachers work with ENL students on content specific needs. The data analysis that supports the rationale for these programs are the large number of entering and emerging ENL students we currently have enrolled in our school. Exactly half of our ENL students (17) are either Entering or Emerging and based on data from our whole student population, it shows that when students are given additional support services outside the regular classroom and the school day, their success rates in earning credits and passing Regents increase. Hence, this year as with the previous year we have decided to continue our strategic and intensive Support Service Program for our ENL students. During the second semester last school year (February 2017 - June 2018), 80% of the ENL students who regularly attended After school and Saturday Academy passed at least one Regents exam in June 2017. The Title III funds allow ACE during this coming school year continue providing funds for both of our ENL teachers to work with the ENL students on Saturdays as well as Before and After School. ENL students will be required to attend Before and After-school and Saturday Academy based on their need for either credit accumulation and / or Regents. The ENL will keep a record of the students who are attending the after school and Saturday Academy sessions and when necessary conduct outreach to parents to encourage attendance. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teacher attends all the professional developments provided by the District Field office and New York Statewide Language RBERN. The ENL teachers then turnkey these professional developments to the entire staff during our weekly Monday PD. In addition, content-specific teachers also share best practices with the staff on strategies to motivate, engage and increase learning with ELL students. These PDs are offered on Mondays from 2:25 pm - 3:45pm. All Professional Development offered will filed in the PD binder along with agendas and sign-in sheets and are maintained by the Peer Collaborative Teacher. The dates of the ENL- based Professional Developments are: September 24, 2018 2018-19 CEP 72  Part C: Professional Development November 19, 2018 December 17, 2018 March 11, 2019 April 22, 2019 May 13, 2019 These PDs are all 80 minutes long and are given to the entire staff and the strategies described above are explored. The purpose of these PDs is to ensure that the entire instructional staff are using effective instructional strategies that will assist our ENL students to be successful in all their classes, earn credits and are successful on their Regents exams which will eventually lead them to be life-long learners and have a successful post high school career. These sessions are part and parcel with our schools on going professional development. In addition, we will continue in 2018-2019 to use an outside provider, Creative Classroom Solutions, to provide professional development to the staff as well as one-on-one teacher coaching to the teachers on various topics such as: "Creating High Level Tasks for ELLs", "Strategies to Assess ELL students", "Assisting ELL students in the classroom". We do not use any Title III funds for this program. Our hope is that these coaching sessions with Creative Classroom Solutions will positively impact our ENL population as the coaches observe the teachers and give specific and timely feedback on strategies of integrating our ENL students into the core content areas and academic support services and techniques to ensure their success and eventually timely graduation. The majority of Title III funds will go towards the salaries of our two ENL teachers and for the professional development they receive from Generation Ready, who provided our two ENL teachers with 7-full days of professional development. in 2018-2019, Generation Ready will provide 7 full-day again of planning sessions with our ENL teachers. During these sessions, our ENL teachers will work on the implementation of the new curriculum developed during the last academic year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Evening Parental Engagement: At ACE, it is our belief that students' achievement increases proportionally with parental engagement. As a result the staff and Administration works in close collaboration with the PTA and with the assistance of our parent coordinator to plan evening activities to keep our ELL parents involved in the education of their children. All meetings and communications to parents of our ENL population is done in their home language. Fortunately on staff we have people who speak Arabic, Urdu, Spanish and Haitian Creole. Data from our parent orientation, ELL identification meeting, and various informal surveys of our ELL drive the evening activities that we plan for the parents of our ENL students. This data shows that many times the parents were also new immigrants to the country and as a result required assistance with various local and government agencies as well as assistance with finding gainful employment. As a result, the parent coordinator and the PTA organized a series of workshops including but not limited to the following: 2018-19 CEP 73  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities - Resume Writing Workshop - Job Fairs - "Managing your Money and Budgeting" - Provider and sponsor: Santander Bank - NY ID: How does undocumented people get a NY State ID - "Getting Health Insurance" - Provider and sponsor: Affinity Health - "Fire Safety during the Holidays" - Provider and sponsor: FDNY - ENL Classes for adults - providing information on various ESL programs for adults - "How to Communicate with your Teenager" - Provider and sponsor: CAMBA - "Helping your Teenager Succeed" - Provider and sponsor: CAMBA - "How to Assist your ENL Child Reach High Academic Achievements" - provided by the ENL teacher and other staff members. (This workshop is specific to Title III.) -"How to support your child's learning in school and at home using your native and new language. (This workshop is specific to Title III.) - "Regents Workshop" - provided by school staff: we discuss the format of the exams, strategies and support services offered to ELL students to assist them in passing the Regents exams - "Applying to College as an ELL Student" - provided by our College Counselor - Financial Aid Workshop - provided by our College Counselor These workshops are held throughout the year (at least 1 workshop every two months) and last for about two-hours. Since all parent workshops are done in collaboration with the PTA, the Parent Coordinator keeps a record of the agendas, and attendance sheets for these events and are held in the main office. as well as the ENL teachers. Parents are notified in their home language of all of these programs and others through our Phone Messaging, letters, fliers and phone calls by staff members who speak their home language. Most of these activities are offered either on Saturday mornings or weekday evenings and usually last between 1 - 2 hours. Most of these events are attended by the parents and their children, therefore refreshments / lunch / diner are usually provided. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 76 hours x $48 per session fee = 3,666 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Funds used to subsidize the salary of the ENL teacher. Per session for teacher offering additional instructional support to ELL students during zero period, after school and during our Saturday School program. Per session to staff members who present during workshops to parents of ELL students during evening and Saturday workshops. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional Development for staff by Generations Ready for a total of 8 days equal $8,700.00 Purchased services  High quality staff $8,700.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A Services for ELL Students N/A N/A N/A $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 75  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Academy for Conservation and Environment Borough Brooklyn School Number 637 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eugene Mazzola Coach Izzy Galante ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shazia Qureshi Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Follenius/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Kenneth Chung /Math Related-Service Provider Debbie Hoffer Superintendent Michael Pryor Assistant Principal Sybil Girard Coach Dr. Nicole Galante School Counselor Osama Mostafa Parent Jorel Adrien Parent Coordinator Regina Barber Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 285 2018-19 CEP 76 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1) All of our students will take the Fall New York City Preassessments/Baselines in ELA. Based on these assessments we will be able to assess the writing skills of our students in English. All students are enrolled in a College Literacy class, that, amongst other things, offers students practice in reading, writing, and interpreting information using the Keys to Learning, Keystone Bridges, and Keystone's program. To begin this program at the appropriate level, students must complete an initial assessment that provides us with baseline data regarding their ability to read and understand non-fiction writing, and which we then use to help guide further instruction and develop differentiated materials. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 77  At our weekly inquiry meetings teachers share data on students with the ELL teacher, Ms. Brand and vice versa. We use the data on students to adjust instruction as well as to plan interventions when necessary. Data from exams like the NYSESLAT, the New York City Preassessments / Baselines in ELA as well as data from the classroom is used. Teachers and the ENL teacher use inquiry spaces to share concerns about students and instructional strategies that work. During weekly content meetings and common planning time teachers plan and create lesson plans and assessments for ENL students in the stand alone, co teaching and subject areas with no co-teacher. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will examine the results of our NYSESLAT and our Spring New York City assessments to determine progress in the different areas. We also look at which classes students are able to achieve highest proficiency in order to determine which teachers are most effective with our ENL students and what strategies seem to be most effective in assisting this population of students with their understanding of information. Our school uses a variety of assessment tools to assess early literacy skills of our ENL students. Students 8th grade assessements let us know whether they are a level 1,2,3,or 4 when beginning high school. For new freshman, sophomores, juniors and seniors who took the NYSESLAT in the previous years, we use their data from the EDAT to assess their strengths and weaknesses when it comes to listening, speaking, reading and writing. Ms. Qureshi and Mr. Ameh, our ENL certified teachers work with Ms. Girard, Assistant Principal, to create goals for students based on the data provided in the EDAT reports. We also use student portfolios to assess more specific strengths and weaknesses in their reading and writing. New ENL students take the NYSITELL within the first 10 days of their enrollment. Ms. Qureshi, the ESL Coordinator, uses the NYSITELL grades and NYSITELL written scoring rubric to determine the students skills in reading and writing as well as to set reading and writing goals for those students. Uniform unit assessments and finals are given in all departments. Finals are given in January and June. The results are used by teachers to assess students' areas of improvements as well as their weak areas. The departments meet to do item analysis for midterm and final exams. Ms. Qureshi is informed of the results and uses this information to goal set for students. In January, eligible students including ENL students take the ELA regents. Ms. Girard, Assistant Principal, and the English teachers perform an item analysis of each multiple-choice question on the Regents. Ms. Qureshi uses this data to again adjust her goals for her students as well as her curriculum to reflect the needs of her students. All of these exams and their results act as predictors for student performance on the NYSESLAT, which students will take in April and May as well as for the English Regents in June. We have implemented a rubric for the ENL program and use that to judge the ENL program. This rubric will be based on the CR-Part 154 as well as best practices shown in the field. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have several structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. We have morning and after school tutoring with ENL and subject area teachers as well as Saturday school. Students cal also attend Regents prep classes that begin two months before exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2) The NYSITELL helps the ENL teacher to understand what modalities the students are excelling in and what most students are struggling in. NYSITELL data for our newly admitted ELL shows that this student has few fluency issues, but struggles to comprehend text. Literacy skills need to be improved as well as language skills. The NYSESLAT similarly informs us of the areas that students are mostly struggling in. Students have their own instructional plans and has their own unique skills to work on. 2018-19 CEP 78  The New York City Preassessment in ELA tells us that ELLs are struggling with academic text. Their basic skills and level of vocabulary impede them from performing well in the content areas. This has informed the ENL teacher instruction by having students read leveled texts. Also, as an instructional goal, the ENL teacher has laid out a plan to get ELLs reading appropriately at their grade level. Tests show this, that students struggle with the reading and therefore struggle with the writing. The ENL teacher includes read alouds of fiction and non fiction texts as well as content area texts. This is done daily for each student to help them improve their listening and reading skills and in turn their writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ACE's ENL coordinator works with Ms. Girard, A.P. who adjusts schedules as necessary based on data from ATS and the use of the EDAT tool. The ENL Coordinator also has one period each day dedicated to dealing with programatic and testing issues for ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped by proficiency levels into freestanding ENL classes with our ENL Teachers. There are no more than 2 contiguous grades in each class. Entering and Emerging ELLs are placed into the stand alone ENL class. Transitioning students are placed into another freestanding class focusing on writing. In this class the ENL Teachers work with the students on improving their academic language skills across all content areas. All ELLs are placed into integrated co teaching classes with a content Teacher and an ENL Teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL Teacher works closely with administration on programming the ELLs to ensure that all ELLs properly receive their mandated minutes as per Part 154. Ms. Qureshi and Mr. Ameh teach 2 periods of stand alone ENL per day, and co teach ELA and other content classes with ELLs each day. All students' programs are reviewed on a regular basis to ensure that all programming requirements have been met. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since this school only has a freestanding ENL program, all content instruction is delivered in English. The ENL Teacher works closely with the content area Teachers in planning instruction so that it is accesible by the ELLs. In addition, all ELLs have access 2018-19 CEP 79  to content specific glossaries and dictionaries in their home language. Materials that are more accessible to the ELLs which include visual representations of vocabulary, and more simple text samples. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All city and state based assessments are given to the students in their home language. Their performance on these high stakes assessments drive instruction and planning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At this time we do not have this subgroup, however upon admitting SIFE ELLs, we will place the SIFE ELLs into a sheltered instruction environment. b. Newcomers are provided with basic language instruction. The ENL Teacher starts with the English Alphabet if needed, and progresses into word structure and the basics of English grammar. Student's first language is heavily used as a support through the use of translations and language dictionaries. c. Developing ELLs are provided with instruction that closely aligns to the Common Core ELA and Social Studies standards. Students will be able to read informational texts and create claims and counterclaims to an argument while providing evidence from source material. d. Long Term ELLs are provided with academically rigorous language. Their academic vocabulary and language skills are fine tuned to each individual student and the subjects they are struggling in. e. Former ELLs are provided with instruction that targets each student's lowest performing skill. The ENL Teacher co-plans lessons with content Teachers that will enable each student to maximize their learning through targeted instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use graphic organizers and other scaffolding materials when designing instruction for content area classes. The ISS team in the school provides the ELL Coordinator and content area Teachers will additional ideas and materials to target each ELL-SWD's classifying condition. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELL Coordinator works closely with the ISS Coordinator to create an action plan that best serves the ELL-SWD's language and IEP needs. ELL-SWDs are programmed first to ensure that their language and IEP needs are being met. The ELL Coordinator and ISS Coordinator work closely together with the ELL-SWD's Teachers to ensure that instruction is effective for the particular student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL Teachers co-teach classes in English and History content areas and can push in when further necessary. English cannot be learned in isolation. As newcomers learn the basics of language, they learn the content. The ENL teacher as a co-teacher modifies text and lessons for ELLs to participate in the content area lesson. The ENL Teachers plan lessons with the content area Teachers to specifically target the skills that our ELLs need additional instruction in. Class Assessments are also designed to be able to identify the high-needs skills in each content area. All Teachers follow the 3 tiered response to intervention model. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 80  We are planning to have more ELL involvement in the school's Student Government and Student Organization. We want ELL input when we decide where to go for class trips and other activities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Staff that speak the ELL's home language are available for interpretation at all school events. In addition, ELLs are invited to participate in all school programs through the use of school staff that speak their home language. When ELLs are at school events, they work closely together with their ENL Teachers and other staff that speak their home language in order to fully participate. Our staff include Spanish, Haitian- Creole, Bengali, Urdu, French, Yoruba, Arabic, and Hindi speakers. When necessary, we have translators on hand to assist students with their needs so they can have equal access to all school programs, during school and after school. ELLs have available to them tutoring during morning and after school hour four days a week and on Saturday for four hours. Students can get supplemental instruction as well as regents review during these hours, 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We provide laptops for language support to ELLs that feel they need it. English learner dictionaries and language dictionaries are available for ELLs to use in each class. ELLs are provided with content specific glossaries for each content area. Students also have tablets for use in content and ENL classes. Students also have access to a leveled library, Rosetta Stone English Language Program and Keystone Learning textbooks. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL: N/A TBE: N/A ENL: Translation services, regents glossaries, and home language dictionaries are provided to all ELLs 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL Coordinator conducts spot checks of ELL compliance records, and observes classroom instruction to ensure that all ELL instruction aligns to the NYS Regents Examinations and contains grade level informational text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We provide laptops for language support to ELLs that feel they need it. English learner dictionaries and language dictionaries are available for ELLs to use in each class. ELLs are provided with content specific glossaries for each content area. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). School tours and program outlines are conducted with new ELLs and their parents in their home language. The parents of new ELLs also meet with the ELL Coordinator and Guidance Counselor for a conference to answer any question they may have. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school currently only offers Spanish as a foreign language, with the ability to take the LOTE exam. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 CEP 81  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All Teachers of ELLs will participate in professional development relating the instruction of ELLs. There are weekly 80 minute PD sessions held every Monday after the instructional day, and in addition, Teachers can be sent to PD sessions throughout the year. Similar PD opportunities will be afforded to school secretaries and assistant principals. The ELL Coordinator will hold in school Professional Development sessions on the instruction of ELLs that total at least 15% of all Professional Development time. The sessions will be designed to have participants feel like newly arrived ELLs, so that they can see what it is like to learn academic content with minimum language skill. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide new ELLs with ELLs that speak the same home language and have been in the school for at least a year to walk with them from class to class and to serve as a general mentor. These ELL mentors follow the student for their first semester in the school. The ELL Coordinator works closely with the Peer Collaborative Teacher and Professional Development team on planning Professional Development sessions to ensure that 15% of all Professional Development hours are ELL related. All topics and agendas for Professional Development sessions are kept by the school administrative staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? After January Regents week, the ELL Coordinator invited all parents of ELLs to come to school for a mid year summary and debriefing. Parents have the opportunity to ask any questions about their student's progress and the programs that the school provides. A bilingual translator: Our staff can translate for parent-teacher conferences, back-to-school nights, PTA meetings, and regular communication. Notes and letters are sent home sent home in preferred language of communication of parents. This keeps parents in the loop on issues such as report cards, school events, and homework. Our parent coordinator gives parents a list of names and phone numbers of bilingual staff in the school and district who they can contact to deal with educational concerns. We also encourage them to reach out to other parents who are bilingual or monolingual so they can share experiences and help one another. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 82  All ELL parents are invited to be a part of the school PTA. Interpretation services can be provided to the parents if needed. The parent coordinator acts as an advocate for the parents and ensures that parents of ELLs are included in school functions. The ENL Coordinator meets each parent in individual conferences throughout the year to discuss students academic and language progress. Translators are available at these meetings. Furthermore, to support their children's education, the parents of our ELL students need to understand how the U.S. school system and culture work. We listen to parents' concerns, answer their questions, and provide them with written materials in their preferred language. We support parents by inviting them to events that Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 83 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eugene Mazzola, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 84  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ACE School DBN: 18K637 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eugene Mazzola Title Principal Sybil Girard Assistant Principal Regina Barber Parent Coordinator Shazia Qureshi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jorel Adrien Parent Niocle Follenius/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Kenneth Chung/Math Teacher/Subject Area Izzy Galante Dr. Nicole Galante Coach Coach Osama Mostafa School Counselor Michael Prayor Aaron Perez Debbie Hoffer Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brooklyn South Other Speech Langauge Path Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/201/7 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 2018-19 CEP 85 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: ACE Superintendent: Michael Prayor DBN: 18K637 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Shazia Qureshi ENL Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon intake and student enrollment, the ELL Coordiantor, Language Access Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and Parent Coordinator meet with all new students and parents and conduct the HLIS. The results of the HLIS determine which languages will be used for parent contact in the oral and written forms. Other ways we collect home language preferences is through ATS data reports, the blue cards that parents fill out in September, and parent and Teacher surveys collected by class. Parents of non-ELLs are included when asking for home language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 86  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 80.59 271 79.71 274 17 1 1 25 2 13 7 ENGLISH ARABIC BENGALI FRENCH HAITIAN CREOLE NAHUATL SPANISH URDU 5.0 0.29 0.29 7.35 0.59 3.82 2.06 18 2 1 26 2 13 7 5.29 0.59 0.29 7.65 0.59 3.82 2.06 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Student Handbook September and throughout the school year as new students are enrolled. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have on staff personnel that speaks the languages represented by our students. Most times documents that need to be translated are translated by these staff members who are native to the various languages. The Student Handbook is revised during the summer months and staff members are brought in to translate into the various languages so that parents of new incoming students are able to get translated versions of this document during the new student orientation in August. On few occasions we also use the translation services provided by the DOE. 2018-19 CEP 87  Back-To-School-Night Flyer September SKEDULA Log-in Letter September Parent -Teacher Conferences Invitations September, November, March and May Progress Reports Every 14 - 16 instructional days in each semester Report Cards At the end of each Marking Period - Four times in each semester Saturday School / Regents Prep Invitations and Schedules October and March Regents Schedule January and June Other School Letters with important information, Letters from the PTA , SLT and Parent Coordinator September - June Staff members who are native to the languages translate the flyer and ensure that its in a format that will be well received by our parents/guardians. This letter can be printed in the parent's preferred language directly from Skedula / Pupil Path. Staff members who are native to the languages translate the invitations and ensure that its in a format that will be well received by our parents/guardians. The Progress Reports are printed in the parent's preferred language directly from Skedula / Pupil Path. All comments are translated to the parent's preferred language. All comments are translated to the parent's preferred language by staff members. Parents of students who have been identified by their Guidance Counselors to receive academic interventions in the form of Saturday School, After-School Tutoring or Regents Prep receive an invitation letter explaining the purpose of the intervention as well as the child's schedule for that program. These letters are translated by staff members of the native languages and are distributed to students and their parents. Schedules of exam dates and times for each student are translated by staff members of the native languages and are distributed to students and parents. Translated by staff members of the native languages and distributed to students and parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back-to-School Night September interpretation service(s)? We are fortunate at ACE to have at least one staff member who is able to speak the languages represented by our student population. These staff 2018-19 CEP 88  ENL Mid-year Conference January Parent-Teacher Conferences September, November, March and May Guidance and Dean Meetings September - June Mentoring Meetings September - June members who are fluent in the various language and they are able to provide translation / interpretation services to students and their families. If parents prefer someone who is not from the school, we make available the DOE Translation Unit to them. Staff members who are fluent in the various language are able to provide translation / interpretation services to students and their families during these meetings. If parents prefer someone who is not from the school, we make available the DOE Translation Unit to them. Staff members who are fluent in the various language are able to provide translation / interpretation services to students and their families during these meetings. If parents prefer someone who is not from the school, we make available the DOE Translation Unit to them. Staff members who are fluent in the various language are able to provide translation / interpretation services to students and their families during these meetings. If parents prefer someone who is not from the school, we make available the DOE Translation Unit to them. Staff members who are fluent in the various language are able to provide translation / interpretation services to students and their families during these meetings. If parents prefer someone who is not from the school, we make available the DOE Translation Unit to them. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We are one of the very few High Schools in New York City where we have at least one staff member who is proficient in the languages represented by our students and their families. These staff members varies from Administrative staff, Guidance Counselor, Teacher, Paraprofessional, ect. Therefore, in the event of a school emergency, we are always able to reach our limited-English-proficient families and effectively communicate with them the nature of the emergency and the steps we are taking as a school community to resolve it safely and peacefully. Parents and students appreciate this about our school as many of our Arabic families have verbalized during meetings with Administration. In addition to real-time phone calls to inform the families about the situation we also follow up with a 2018-19 CEP 89  letter a few days later explaining the resolution to the emergency. These letters are also translated in their native language by one of our assigned staff members who are native to the language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, changes to the Regulation and the resources available to meet compliance when this Regulation is discussed during our first staff meeting at the start of each school year. Staff members are also given a copy of this Regulation in their welcome packet which includes items such as other important Chancellor's Regulations, Staff Handbook, ect. A copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is also available in the main office with the Secretary for easy access throughout the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will determine a student's primary language within 10 days of enrollment. All parents will be able to use the language identification documents when communicating with school staff. School staff will use this information when contacting the Translation Unit, and while using their assistance, explain to them that the Translation Unit is available any time a parent wants to communicate with school staff. It will be emphasized that there are no time restrictions for this service, and that any time they wish to communicate with school staff, either over the phone or face-to-face, the Translation Unit will be available. In addition, the NYC DOE website is available in multiple languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator will conduct informal spot check surveys with parents multiple times throughout the school year. The LAC will modify procedures based off of the survey results. At the mid year ENL meeting, a focus group of parents with diverse cultural backgrounds will be formed to give feedback on all aspects of the school's instructional and extra curricular program. Parents who attend the PTA meetings also provide feedback and these are forwarded to the school's administration. On example of a feedback received that we implemented, was the need to have more frequent students' progress reports to parents. As a result the school purchased Skedula so that parents can receive progress reports about the progress of the child n the native language as well as being able to access their child's grades, attendance and behaviors by using Pupil Path App from their mobile device. Now it has become a standard question from our school Administrators when looking to purchase various programs that will communicate students' academic records and data (Regents analysis) to their parents: "Can these reports be seen and printed in multiple languages?" 2018-19 CEP 90  2018-19 CEP 91 
