2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 23K643 School Name: BROOKLYN DEMOCRACY ACADEMY Principal: DEZ-ANN ROMAIN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Democracy Academy 23k643 332300011643 9-12 Transfer High School School Number (DBN): 985 Rockaway Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11692 718-342-6590 Phone Number: 718-342-6708 Fax: Dez-Ann Romain dromain@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dez-Ann Romain Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: ArmondoMadera Jr. Michele Madison Kristen Rowland-Volonakis SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Natalie Richardson Judith Atongi Oliver Moe Shirley Vaughan District Information Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet #410 New York, NY, 10002 protondo@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: 212-432-8035 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 23 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristen Rowland Armando Madera Jr. Michele Madison (Parent) Glen James Natalie Richardson (parent) Judith Atongi Omar James Shirley Vaughan AminaAbdul-Wahhab MajorieDavis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ZoeannJames Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our vision is that every student realizes nothing less than their full potential. Our students will become academically, emotionally, and socially equipped to compete and succeed remarkably in 21 st century society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn Democracy Academy (BDA) is a transfer school that services over age under credited students between the ages of 16 to 21. BDA currently has a student population of 217. The population demographics are as followed: Gender Male 123 56.68% Female 94 43.32% Ethnicity Hispanic 37 17.05% American Indian or Alaskan Native 5 2.3% Asian 1 0.46% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 1 0.46% Black 171 78.8% White 2 0.92% English Language Learners (ELL) ELL 7 3.23% Special Education Total students with IEPs 57 26.27% All students that are enrolled in our program previously attended a community high school for one or more years. However, for a myriad of reasons students found themselves unable to successfully complete the academic requirements for graduation in their prior setting. BDA has a strong student centered school culture that is grounded in the concept that the school community must operate as a family. As such, all stakeholders in the school community are committed to providing wraparound services to ensure students reach their full potential socially, emotionally, and academically to function effectively in 21st century society. In order to meet the needs of our constituents BDA has the following systems and initiatives:  BDA is partnered with JCCA of New York as an onsite CBO. They provide each student with an advocate counselor, who connects with the student and their family as soon as the student goes through the intake process. This relationship ensures that there is constant dialogue between the school, student, and community. 2018-19 CEP 10   BDA DOE staff and JCCA staff meet on a regular basis to design supports for students in school. During joint planning sessions we design student specific interventions to improve student outcomes in attendance, work readiness, behavior, Regents exams, and credit accumulation.  BDA is partnered with New Visions, Job First, and OBT to provide work readiness, certification and CDOS credentialed opportunities for students and families.  BDA offers an accelerated credit opportunity to students where we offer 6.5 to 7 credits per trimester. Students have the opportunity to earn 21 credits in a school year and additional opportunities during the summer.  BDA offers online courses to students who may have hardships coming to school, including those who have illnesses, are caring for family members with illnesses, or who have given birth.  We have a designated college and career team that plans trips both in and outside of New York City throughout the year. We are also a part of the College Access for All program, which will provide students with additional college and career readiness supports.  BDA is also a part of AP for All and will offering AP courses in Math and ELA.  BDA provides hands on learning opportunities for students through its Urban Farming labs. As a part of this program BDA will be launching an organic farmers market for the community on school grounds.  BDA provides internship opportunities to students through the Learning to Work program.  We have a student leadership team, which has a strong voice in the school. They have participated in discussion with BDA administrators concerning school policy and CEP goals. They have designed school spirit days and also spearheaded community service initiatives.  BDA also participates in the Single Shepherd Initiative. We were given two single shepherds to assist our students with their social and emotional growth. We also have a strong athletic program through PSAL and other Prep leagues, which has afforded our students the opportunity to attend college on full scholarships. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Brooklyn Democracy Academy is a transfer high school that serves overage/under-credited, economically disadvantaged, homeless, transient, formerly incarcerated,ELL, and SWD, who are 16-21 years of age. Our population experience academic, social emotional, and/or attendance challenges that may impede their rate of progress and success. As a result, our students greatly benefit from smaller class sizes, innovative instruction, strong relationships with support teams, and a large amount of real world opportunities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. BDA will focus on Rigorous instruction and Collaborative teachers from the framework. Instructional Focus 2018-2019: As a transfer school that is preparing students for 21st century society, students and teachers will participate in a continual cycle of actionable feedback using the lens of race equity. Within each lesson, and within each element of learning, teachers will deepen students' critical thinking skills through Authentic Learning Tasks, Close Reading and Annotation, and Multiple Checks for Understanding for continual actionable feedback to improve learning. Our priority continues to be the area of ELA. Even though there was some growth in teacher pedagogy, the impact is not yet quantifiable in student data. The deficits in ELA has also impacted Math performance. We will be exploring the use of research based interventions to continue to boost our college readiness scores in both Math and ELA. 2018-19 CEP 11  The areas in which we grew most over the last school year were in teacher collaboration and the development of rigorous instruction. Over the last year at Brooklyn Democracy Academy we have been able to develop a strong professional community in collaboration with the Learning Partners Program. We have used a model teacher led team structure in order to facilitate team analysis of pedagogy and its impact on student data. (i.e. student work, regents exam scores, and credit accumulation.) The data was disaggregated and used for the identification of curricular needs, which led to improved curriculum output and the implementation of best practices. We also initiated a school wide close reading and writing initiative, which has formalized reading and writing practices in all subject areas and provided us with another tool to assess writing, assess content knowledge, and help us evaluate our teaching. Another school wide focus for us has been that of questioning and discussion and we have worked in our professional teams to continue working with Japanese lesson study. Utilizing this practice we have been able to plan lessons with a focus of question and discussion, provide the opportunity to observe each other, and utilize findings of our observations to further plan. Staff at Brooklyn Democracy Academy holds each other accountable by providing individual tasks in teacher team meetings and rotating observation schedules so that all of the teachers are seen during lesson study. They have been able to encourage collaboration by planning with each other, taking low inference notes when they observe, and supporting next steps in the observation process. It is our firm belief that collaborative teachers are the foundation for successful schools. For students to be successful in school professionals need to collaborate around the needs of the students. For this to happen there need to be structures in place for teachers to plan together utilizing qualitative and quantitative data about students, to observe each others' practice, and to respond to data collected in classrooms to improve instruction. This is the basis of what we have continued to do at BDA this year. In our lesson study initiative we have structured planning, observation, and debrief so that each teacher has had the opportunity to be collaborative in a meaningful way. Teachers have acknowledged the growth of they and their students have experienced due to their collaboration in lesson study and this is a practice that we will work diligently to expand at our school. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K643 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 230 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 3 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 79.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 16.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.92 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 42% 30% 15.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO No N/A 70 51 56.8% 3.0% 26.5% 80.4% 1.3% 1.3% 2 21% 8.6 N/A N/A 43% 31% 44.2% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Quality Review 2015-2016 (1.1): BDA ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards, integrate the instructional shifts and make purposeful decisions to build coherence. Curricula and academic tasks consistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher-order skills. (Proficient)  Quality Review 2015-2016 (1.2): Teaching practices are informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. All learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products; however, there were missed opportunities to push critical thinking further throughout lessons. (Proficient)  Quality Review 2015-2016 (2.2):The assessment practices provide actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. Assessment results are used to adjust curricula and instruction. (Proficient) School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 81 percent over age under credited students graduated. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 56 percent of the 6th year cohort graduated an increase of 7 percent from the previous year.    At teacher team meetings teachers and administrators engage in professional development regarding best practices and inquiry work to identify student needs and strategies to best meet them. It is through this work that BDA staff have identified strategies for improving questioning and discussion in the classrooms including: Utilizing essential questions based on DOK. These questions are posted in each classroom and are intended to encourage higher order thinking skills amongst the students.  Using the Hess Rigor Matrix to develop rigorous tasks that are skill focused.  Developed a three step close reading protocol to assist students in developing a deep understanding of text, which allows them to be able to support their verbal or written responses with strong relevant evidence. Needs:  Quality Review 2015-2016 (1.2): Although scaffolds were provided during lessons, there were missed opportunities, in a few classes, to encourage students to think critically. For example, in a class on Latin culture, the teacher posed questions such as, “How can poetry explore the issues of the border differently than a news article or other game of writing?”, and “If you had to choose an experience in your life to write a book of poetry about, what experience would you choose and why?” However, students responded with “my mother”, “a teen in New York”, and “gang violence”, when addressing the second question. No additional questions were asked to promote higher order thinking.  As a focus area on the April 16th 2016 QR, we have chosen to focus on building a coherent set of beliefs in our faculty and students about how to support learners to know what they know and learn how to show it. 2018-19 CEP 14  (Danielson 3d.)To support this focus we have decided to revisit Danielson 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) to align strong assessment to strong instruction. “At the the distinguished level, the teacher plans instruction that takes into account the specific learning needs of each student and solicits ideas from students on how best to structure the learning.” Danielson, C, et al. (2009) Implementing he Framework for Teaching in Enhancing Professional Practice. Alexandria, Va.: ASCD. P. 113.    We intend to build the impact of actionable feedback to develop teacher pedagogy. Though feedback was precise during the QR, we are asking teachers to more aware of feedback that pushes student growth and ownership of their learning. We intend to build the impact of actionable feedback to develop teacher pedagogy. Though feedback was precise during the QR, we are asking teachers to more aware of feedback that pushes student growth and ownership of their learning. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 61 percent of teachers stated that they are able to collaborate. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 69 percent of the school community believe we are meeting the academic rigor. June 2018 CC ELA Regents pass rate is 16.98 %, o students were college ready. June 2018 CC Integrated Algebra pass rate is 14.63%, o students were college ready. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: HST College Readiness Index is 21.9% post secondary enrollment rate foe OA/UC School Quality Guide 2017-2018:15.9 percent regents completion rate.      Average Regents Score ELA- 51.3  Average Regents Score Algebra I - 55.6 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In school year 2018-2019, 100% of teachers in will engage students in rigorous and relevant instruction by creating units and authentic learning tasks that include close reading/annotation, planned for and assessed student thinking skills that are framed at the high end of the HESS Rigor Matrix, which will improve our College Readiness Index by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The research-based instructional programs will include: All Students September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers and administrators  During one-on-one coaching sessions teachers will develop activities and assignments that provide opportunities for deeper exploration of content using targeted skills from the Hess Rigor Matrix aligned to subject area.  Teachers will be engaged in inter-visitation and instructional rounds to strengthen teachers' practice and improve student performance.  The will be a Lead Math and ELA  teacher providing instructional support to teachers twice a week. In-House Professional Learning Activities will be utilized to teach learning targets that are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and CCLS. Teachers will analyze data periodically to drive teacher pedagogy. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, ELL, and other high-need student subgroups (i.e. SIFE, STH) will be highlighted in the design process: SWD, ELL's, September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers and administrators  Each lesson study group will have a special educator as a team member. They will assist all staff in 2018-19 CEP 16 developing close reading and writing protocol for SWD, ELLs, struggling readers, and writers to be successful. Student work will be analyzed weekly to gauge effectiveness of the strategies. Small group tutoring-use of set specific goals for instruction.   Push-in/pull-out program- use of set goals for instruction.  ELL- Using extensive vocabulary and other visual aids to scaffold techniques allowing access for all. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement will be: Parents and family September 2018-2019 Administrators and parent coordinator  Administrators and the parent coordinator will meet with the PTA and other parent/family partners to discuss our continued drive to improve writing.  Use an online platform called Kinvolve to inform parents of BDA instructional goals for the year.  Monthly 'Sip and Chat' with the Principal to report progress and provide an open forum for parents to voice their concerns. External experts will facilitate professional development sessions for chosen staff members on: Teachers Ongoing Model teachers, all teachers, administrators.  P.D. opportunities will be used with teachers coming back to turn key the knowledge to the staff  How to use Learning Targets most effectively to teach the most rigorous lessons/units and also as an assessment tool to gage students' progress.  Teacher teams will use protocols to look at student work to inform their instruction.  Teachers will address common core shifts 3,5 and 6 in ELA and 1, 2, and 4 in Math. Data will be collected using teacher made school wide rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year BDA will be facilitating workshops for parents that will grant them access to curriculum, sample lesson plans, and workshops. We will be establishing a social media presence which will be overseen by our community coordinator, that will provide consistent and continuous updates about BDA instruction. There will be monthly open houses encouraging all parents to visit classrooms and experience their child's learning themselves, which will conclude in a 'Sip and Chat" with the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Coaches  Principal  Assistant Principal   Teachers  Model Teachers  New Vision Support  Parent Coordinator   Per Session when possible Substitue teachers for possible coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Administrators will observe a lesson study module each trimester and will participate in observations during inter-visitations. They will conduct needs assessments alongside Lead Teachers and the staff developer.  We will analyze January regents utilizing our regents item analysis tool and look at writing on the regents as an indicator of progress.  Teachers will address common core shifts 3,5 and 6 in ELA and 1, 2, and 4 in Math. Data will be collected using teacher made school wide rubrics. BDA will also analyze the culminating Quick Write assessments at the end of each bench mark that are based on these rubrics.  By the end of January 2019, all teachers will create and engage students through at least one performance task and multiple lessons that is rigorous and relevant and framed and framed at the high end of the knowledge taxonomy where students are required to build, create, or generate a project to assess student's learning by evidence increasing their ELA and Math Regents score by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January regents exams given in each subject area in January and June will be used to assess student readiness. Regents item analysis for SY 18 and January regents item analysis will also be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  Quality Review 2015-2016 (3.4): The school leader consistently communicates high expectations to the entire staff, and provides training for those expectations. The school leader and staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness. (Well Developed) School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 92 percent of students stated that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, and cafeteria of their school. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 94 percent of students stated that they trust their teachers. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 81 percent over age under credited students graduated. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 56 percent of the 6th year cohort graduated an increase of 7 percent from the previous year.      BDA and JCCA are partnered to provide well rounded support services for students and families, in an effort to reduce all obstacles that may impede academic success. As a team at BDA, we believe that students learn best when they are in a safe and supportive environment to take academic risks. This takes a team approach. While all staff at BDA have a vested interest in the overall well-being of our students, particularly because they have faced failure in the past, by working with JCCA, it affords us additional opportunity to provide very individualized support to students as a team. Needs: June 2018 CC ELA Regents pass rate is 16.98 %, o students were college ready. June 2018 CC Integrated Algebra pass rate is 14.63%, o students were college ready. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: Post Secondary enrollment rate 25.3% School Quality Guide 2017-2018: HST College Readiness Index is 3.2% School Quality Guide 2017-2018:15.9 percent regents completion rate.     Average Regents Score ELA- 51.3  Average Regents Score Algebra I - 55.6    BDA and JCCA continue to work diligently to improve communication between agencies. Our needs at this point are the continued facilitation of a supportive college-bound culture, as well as, also a keen focus on enrollment and college persistence. Although we aim to have all of our students apply to college and encourage their success we have not systemized a network of support for students to persist in college. This will include meeting with families to assist them, particularly in households who have little or no experience with sending someone to college, with planning for college and developing goals for the family to support the student. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 20  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In school year 2018-2019 50% of graduates will enroll in college or vocational program by creating a post-secondary plan, utilizing input from the college/career team, and their families. 20% of the graduates will persist for a year as evidenced by the BDA Alumni tracker. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  On the first and third Fridays of the month, in collaboration with the college and career team, counselors, corresponding ACs , college advisor, parent coordinator , and paraprofessional will meet during designated period to discuss caseloads of students targeted for graduation. Discussions will focus around student’s grades, attendance, regents, credits, socio-emotional status, and post-secondary plans. Counselors, ACs, and Para will obtain all necessary information via Skedula. Skedula will be used as a vehicle by teachers to input grades and attendance, in which appropriate personnel can track a student’s progress.  Students will meet with their counselors on a monthly basis (or as required by single shephard contract). Post-secondary plans will be inputted in the NV portal, and should be modified as necessary throughout the school year. Information will be updated in the “notes” section of the portal under “post-secondary notes” regarding All Graduates By December of 2018 DOE and JCCA Administrators Ongoing Students with disabilities. Parent coordinator, DOE and JCCA Administrators 2018-19 CEP 22 an overview of post-secondary goal and supports being provided. Ms. Rowland will review and follow up on the notes at the beginning of each month.  Parents will be offered a college workshop in which they learn about applications, financial aid, admissions and planning for college. Families/ Community Members December 2018 Parent coordinator, DOE and JCCA Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year BDA will be facilitating workshops for parents that will grant them access to curriculum, sample lesson plans, and workshops. We will be establishing a social media presence which will be overseen by our community coordinator, that will provide consistent and continuous updates about BDA instruction. There will be monthly open houses encouraging all parents to visit classrooms and experience their child's learning themselves, which will conclude in a 'Sip and Chat" with the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session opportunities for goal and inter-agency collaboration, teachers will be scheduled to utilize c-6 for cross collaboration. College Access for All funds will be used to fund trips in and out of state and PSAT, SAT, and ACT prep. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will evaluate the goal tracking system in December of 2018. November grads will be tracked in the New Visions sorter in December. March graduates will be tracked in April 2019. June will be tracked in the sorter by July 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions sorter will be used to analyze college application and acceptance after each term. We will utilize our Robin Hood report to analyze changes in data from year to year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  The areas in which we grew most over the year were in teacher collaboration and the development of rigorous instruction. Over the last three years at Brooklyn Democracy Academy we have been able to develop a strong professional community. We have used a model teacher structure in order to facilitate team analysis of student data such as student work and regents exams using item analysis. The data was disaggregated and used for the identification of curricular needs, which led to improved curriculum output and the implementation of best practices. We established a school wide writing initiative, Quick Writes, which has formalized writing in all subject areas and provided us with another tool to assess writing, assess content knowledge, and help us evaluate our teaching. Another school wide focus for us has been that of question and discussion, and we have worked in our professional teams to begin working with Japanese lesson study. Utilizing this practice we have been able to plan lessons with a focus of questioning and discussion had the opportunity to observe each other, and utilize findings of our observations to further plan. Staff at Brooklyn Democracy Academy holds each other accountable by providing individual tasks in department meetings and rotating observation schedules so that all of the teachers are seen during lesson study. They have been able to encourage collaboration by planning with each other, taking low inference notes when they observe, and supporting next steps in the observation process.   Quality Review 2015-2016 (4.2):The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. Distributed leadership structures are in place so that teachers have built leadership capacity. The inquiry based professional collaborations have resulted in the instructional capacity of teachers being strengthened. Teachers have a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. (Proficient)  Quality Review 2015-2016 (1.2): Teaching practices are informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. All learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products; however, there were missed opportunities to push critical thinking further throughout lessons. (Proficient) School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 81 percent of students stated that there is course clarity.  Needs:    School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 57 percent of teachers stated they get quality professional development. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 75 percent of teachers stated they have an opportunity to collaborate. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 76 percent of teachers stated they have the ability to innovate and share a collective responsibility. 2018-19 CEP 24   Through our lesson study we intend to build collaboration amongst the staff and work to mold our students into better readers and writers at BDA.  Q.R. (2.2): Bolster assessment practices to make certain teachers are consistently checks for understanding and making in the moment adjustments in instruction based on hard and soft data. Make sure that teachers are using data captured throughout the lesson so that they are aware of students’ needs and students are fully aware of their next learning steps. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: Post Secondary enrollment rate 25.3% School Quality Guide 2017-2018: HST College Readiness Index is 3.2% School Quality Guide 2017-2018:15.9 percent regents completion rate.     Average Regents Score ELA- 51.3  Average Regents Score Algebra I - 55.6   June 2018 CC ELA Regents pass rate is 16.98 %, o students were college ready. June 2018 CC Integrated Algebra pass rate is 14.63%, o students were college ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, 100% of teachers will work collaboratively in teacher teams to plan, analyze and conduct deep analysis of data through the lens of close reading/annotation, then develop action steps at the end of each term, to assess and address areas of need in our curriculum and instruction. This will be measured by the increase of 5% in our ELA Regents scores. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in a 3 cycle lesson study, a research based practice to improve instruction and collaboration to improve ELA and Math scores. Improvement will be tracked by increased performance in Daneilson 1a, 1e, 3c and 3d in advance. Special Education teachers will participate in lesson study with each department in order to assist with the development of strategies for students with disabilities. Special education teachers will be purposefully placed in all subject areas and where there is the highest need level. School leadership team and PTA will participate in PD around lesson study and rigorous instruction facilitated by the principal in September of 2018. Parent and SLT feedback will be integrated into the school year. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Lead teachers, instructional coaches, administrators All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Department heads, lead teachers, administrators PTA and SLT September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Quick write rubrics and evidenced based outlines will be implemented by teacher teams. All teachers Ongoing Model teachers, all teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26   During the 2017-2018 school year BDA will be creating a Parent Center, that will be facilitated BDA staff. Parents will have access to college and career informational sessions, and workshops. We will be establishing a social media presence which will be overseen by our community coordinator, that will provide consistent and continuous updates about BDA college and career supports. There will be monthly open houses encouraging all parents to visit classrooms and experience their child's learning themselves. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Coaches  Principal  Assistant Principal   Teachers  Model Teachers  New Vision Support  Parent Coordinator   Per Session when possible with LPP Funds Substitue teachers for possible coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will observe collaborative meetings and participate in inter-visitations. By January 2018, Administration will gather data from all inquiry meetings to track the growth/lack of growth and put systems in place for adaptation and implementation of new strategies as evidenced by student achievement growth of 10% on BDA benchmark assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be utilizing a quick write tracker and benchmark assessments to measure progress after each term. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:   School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 83 percent of the school community have community family ties. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 83 percent of the school community state the school environment is a supportive community.  Quality Review 2015-2016 (3.4):The school leader’s consistency in communicating high expectations has resulted in a culture of mutual accountability for those expectations. The school leader and staff successfully partner with families to support student progress toward those expectations. (Well Developed)  Principal Performance Review (2016-2017): (1.3) The have strategically invested in budget resources, and connected to partnerships, which allow opportunities for students to receive academic and social-emotional supports. Additionally, you are working with organizations to re-brand your school, which will further develop your school culture. (Proficient)  Principal Performance Review (2017-2018): (1.4) The principal devotes time to support students’ social-emotional concerns.  Principal Performance Review (2017-2018): (3.4) The principal have created the opportunity to connect with students and highlight areas of interest that could (if pursued diligently) lead to entrepreneurial activity. Needs:  Q.R. (1.1): Strengthen lesson planning so that across all content areas, lesson plans include multiple ways for diverse learners to access the curricula. Additionally, ensure lesson plans include assessment strategies, and high-level questions to deepen students’ critical and problem solving skills so that learners are receiving daily instruction that promotes college and career readiness. Here is a resource for you to help your teachers understand academic and personal behaviors and examples from Danielson.  Q.R. (1.2): Construct coherent understanding of the school’s instructional focus so that teaching practices are anchored to a school-wide parallel set of beliefs. Also, actively monitor the implementation of lesson plans to ensure lessons include strategies that address students of various academic levels.  Q.R. (2.2): Bolster assessment practices to make certain teachers are consistently checks for understanding and making in the moment adjustments in instruction based on hard and soft data. Make sure that teachers are using data captured throughout the lesson so that they are aware of students’ needs and students are fully aware of their next learning steps. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: Post Secondary enrollment rate 25.3% School Quality Guide 2017-2018: HST College Readiness Index is 3.2% School Quality Guide 2017-2018:15.9 percent regents completion rate.     Average Regents Score ELA- 51.3  Average Regents Score Algebra I - 55.6  June 2018 CC ELA Regents pass rate is 16.98 %, o students were college ready. 2018-19 CEP 28   June 2018 CC Integrated Algebra pass rate is 14.63%, o students were college ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will strengthen their ability to lead via modeling best practices and nurture the professional growth of staff development by conducting at least one professional development per month focusing on developing students skills using close reading/annotation and creating authentic learning tasks across content areas to increase student reading and critical thinking capacity, resulting in at least a 5% increase in the ELA college readiness score. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Provide professional development around critical thinking strategies, close reading protocols, and text based evidence. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, All Teachers, Administrators  Design questions and assignments to move the level of rigor from DOK 1 &2 to DOK 2 &3 using the HESS Cognitive Rigor Matrix for each content area.  Completing two 5 week cycles of observation that includes: 1 soft observations, 1 official observation, one-on-one and group coaching sessions, with actionable feedback.  Teachers, while participating in inter-visitations, will utilize low-inference note taking to identify needs according to the Danielson framework  Special Education teachers will participate in lesson study with each department and will assist them in planning multiple entry points in accordance with highly effective in Danielson. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, All Teachers, Administrators  The SLT will be debriefed on the lesson study initiative PTA, SLT and will be asked to provide feedback. September 2018 Administrators, SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  During the 2018-2019 school year BDA will be facilitating workshops for parents that will grant them access to curriculum, sample lesson plans, and workshops. We will be establishing a social media presence which will be overseen by our community coordinator, that will provide consistent and continuous updates about BDA instruction. There will be monthly open houses encouraging all parents to visit classrooms and experience their child's learning themselves, which will conclude in a 'Sip and Chat" with the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Coaches  Principal  Assistant Principal   Teachers  Model Teachers  New Vision Support  Parent Coordinator   Per Session when possible with LPP Funds Substitue teachers for possible coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will be held accountable for implementing professional development given on 'using close reading protocol, text based evidence to support arguments in discussion across content area to increase student reading and writing capacity, resulting in at least a 5% increase in the ELA college readiness score. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BDA will utilize the January ELA Regents Scores as mid-year marker on progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:      School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school will make them aware if there are any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child's academic performance. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 100% of parents/guardians responded that they are satisfied or very satisfied with the education their child has received this year. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 98% of parents/guardians of a child in grades 9-12 agreed or strongly agreed that their school provides resources to them and their child to prepare their child for college, career, and success in life after high school. School Quality Guide 2017-2018: 100% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with parents/guardians like them. Needs: School Quality Guide 2017-2018: Post Secondary enrollment rate 25.3% School Quality Guide 2017-2018: HST College Readiness Index is 3.2% School Quality Guide 2017-2018:15.9 percent regents completion rate.  Attendance rate- 57 percent  Graduation rate- 56 percent     Average Regents Score ELA- 51.3  Average Regents Score Algebra I - 55.6    June 2018 CC ELA Regents pass rate is 16.98 %, o students were college ready. June 2018 CC Integrated Algebra pass rate is 14.63%, o students were college ready. School Quality Guide 2016-2017:75% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event, or science fair). Low parent/guardian engagement during PTA Meetings, SLT and other family functions.  Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, BDA will host 10 open house events and build an accessible website to increase parent partnership leading to increased parental involvement in school functions and PTA activities as evidenced by increased attendance at PTA/SLT meetings and other school functions as evidence of at least 35% of parents attending at least two events outside of parent Teacher Conference. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Daily phone calls will be made home to parents/students in the morning between 9:00am-10:30am. Phone calls will be made by ACs, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator. ACs and counselors will focus on their caseloads in the morning to ensure students are coming to school. Assistant Principal will confer with JCCA director and will follow up with counselors regarding phone calls throughout the week (utilizing counselors case load to guide which students are assigned to specific counselors). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and Families September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Counselors, Teachers, College Counselor, PTA  Kinvolve will be used as a communication tool for parents and teachers. Parents can log on to see the progress/ lack of progress of their child. Parents and Families September 2018-June 2019 Special education teachers, administrators, counselors, PTA, SLT  Workshops will be offered on various topics throughout the year to provide parents the opportunity to better support their children.  Parents will be informed of opportunities available to them at IEP meetings for their children.  Parent Engagement Team will meet at the beginning of each month to review events for the month/following months. Team may meet more frequently if an event is being held that week/month. The PTA and the SLT will also design workshops that will be of particular interest to families. Their input and planning will shape our PD for parents throughout the school year. PTA and SLT September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, PTA, SLT  Teachers and parent coordinator will consistently Parents Ongoing monitor and update the school's website to ensure that families have access to information. Teachers and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 34  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  During the 2017-2018 school year BDA will be creating a Parent Center, that will be facilitated BDA staff. Parents will have access to college and career informational sessions, and workshops. We will be establishing a social media presence which will be overseen by our community coordinator, that will provide consistent and continuous updates about BDA college and career supports. There will be monthly open houses encouraging all parents to visit classrooms and experience their child's learning themselves. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Coaches  Principal  Assistant Principal   Teachers  Model Teachers  New Vision Support  Parent Coordinator  Community Coordinator   Pupil Accounting Secretary  Meetings will be planned for after school and light refreshments will be served. Some incidental materials School Aide may be purchased for a writing workshop for parents and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, the school will gather data on PTA meetings and other school functions to monitor attendance at family events by evidence of at least 25% of parents in attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly check ins will occur at PTA meetings where families will complete surveys. School will develop alternate survey to track progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher made assessments, regents exams, and special education status will determine level of need. Mathematics Teacher made assessments, regents exams, and special education status will determine level of need. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading intervention available during the day from special education teacher, as well as, literacy licensed teacher. After school ELA tutoring that includes strategies developed from regents item analysis, intake assessment, and teacher made assessments. Push –in special education services available. Math intervention is available during the day including in a SETSS environment for students with disabilities and also after school. Teacher designed activities include small, manageable tasks for students who are struggling. Push –in special education services available. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one to one. Services will be adjusted according to need level and a focus set for a student or group of students. This will include grouping of students with a similar focus (ELL, SWD, students who have sat for regents and failed, low credit accumulation, and other specified foci). One to one will be utilized whenever it is determined to be the best mode of support Small group and one to one. Services will be adjusted according to need level and a focus set for a student or group of students. This will include grouping of students with a similar focus (ELL, SWD, students who have sat for regents and failed, low credit accumulation, and other specified foci). When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and after school. Services can be modified to meet the individual student needs including those who are unable to stay after, come early, or who have a modified schedule. During the day and after school. Services can be modified to meet the individual student needs including those who are unable to stay after, come early, or who have a modified schedule. 2018-19 CEP 36  Science Teacher made assessments, regents exams, and special education status will determine level of need. Science lessons and labs broken into small manageable tasks and students who are struggling are offered after school science intervention and individual lab assistance. Push –in special education services available. Social Studies Teacher made assessments, regents exams, and special education status will determine level of need. Dual licensed special education/ secondary Social Studies teachers assigned to all core classes. Assignments are broken into small, manageable tasks During the day and after school. Services can be modified to meet the individual student needs including those who are unable to stay after, come early, or who have a modified schedule. During the day and after school. Services can be modified to meet the individual student needs including those who are unable to stay after, come early, or who have a modified schedule. One to one will be utilized whenever it is determined to be the best mode of support Small group and one to one. Services will be adjusted according to need level and a focus set for a student or group of students. This will include grouping of students with a similar focus (ELL, SWD, students who have sat for regents and failed, low credit accumulation, and other specified foci). One to one will be utilized whenever it is determined to be the best mode of support Small group and one to one. Services will be adjusted according to need level and a focus set for a student or group of students. This will include grouping of students with a similar focus (ELL, SWD, students who have sat for regents and failed, low credit accumulation, and other specified foci). One to one will be utilized whenever it is determined to be the best mode of support 2018-19 CEP 37  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counselor designed assessments, attendance, and in and out of school incidents. Individual counseling for every student by advocate counselor. One to one and small group. Before, during, and after school every day. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently the school has 10 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funding is set aside for uniforms, supplies, doctors visit, special trips and extended day programs. Professional development will be given to parents. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Teachers are identified through NYC Teacher Finder, which enable administration to locate highly qualified teachers with experience that will make them successful at BDA. ● All teachers receive frequent classroom observations and written feedback with resources connected to the Common Core Learning Standards as well as the Danielson Framework. ● Each teacher receives individualized professional development form the principal, assistant principal, and from CEOptions, an independent consulting group with 40 years of experience in education and a deep knowledge of Common Core as well as Danielson. ● Multiple before and after-school opportunities available for teachers to develop curriculum both in and outside of curriculum teams. ● Bi-weekly meetings in which teachers and administrators analyze student work, testing data, and present common core aligned tasks for one another’s review . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administrators have been involved in job-embedded professional development involving teacher effectiveness. Utilizing the Danielson rubric administrators will work with teachers to develop individual professional development plans and focus PD days around the most pertinent components for our staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 41  Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participated in MOSL decisions throughout the summer. All parties came to the agreement to use default measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 101,362.00 0 0 0 1,674,191.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 43  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Democracy Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Democracy Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) ; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 47  Brooklyn Democracy Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 50  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. participate in mediations as necessary. 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name Brooklyn Democracy Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 643 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dez-Ann Romain Coach Jane Spielman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ronella Pellew Teacher/Subject Area Ronnella Pellew Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Sanon Related-Service Provider Siobhan Morris Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Kristen Rowland-Volonakis Coach Heather Cardinale School Counselor Siobhan Morris Parent Dorret Brown Parent Coordinator Glen James Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 150 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.67% 2018-19 CEP 52  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Brooklyn Democracy Academy is a transfer school that has developed a unique intake process suited to our needs. Our ESL/ELL specialist is a part of our admissions team, and upon request from an admitting advocate counselor, administrator, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, secretary, or community worker, he meets with the perspective students and their families to explain our ESL/ELL services available in our school, to conduct an informal language assessment and interview, and to help the family decide if BDA would be an appropriate placement. When the student is admitted the ESL/ELL specialist uses the San Diego Quick Test to assess students' reading levels in English and implement a program for the school year. To allow students to access curriculum on all levels, teachers are coached on how to use SIOP strategies in their day to day lesson, which ensures multiple entry points for our ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 53  BDA provides teachers with ongoing professional development to address the needs of ELL students, with a great emphasis on multiple checks for understanding throughout the lesson, and quick actionable feedback. We also have structured our intake to accommodate the amount od time it takes for testing a student and communicating students' strengths and needs to staff. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Student's pass rate in classes and Regents Exams, graduation pass rate, and improvement on NYSESLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? AIS services in class, after school and in Saturday school 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Student language skills are improving. At least ninety percent of our ELL population see a growth in in their proficiency levels, and by their graduating year receive a Proficient rating. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? BDA has lesson study and grade teams that include all staff in the school community, which allows data to be shared and disaggregated for finding root causes that could be addressed. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated classes are given, with ENL teacher working within content classes. Pull-out service is given individually, and in ungraded heterogeneous groups. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive at least 50% of their mandated time in a pull out session and the other 50% of their time receiving push in services. Our ELL specialist also tailors her delivery of services based on the needs of each student. 2018-19 CEP 54  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are enrolled in regular content classes in English with SIOP/Push-in support from ENL teacher. Focus on literacy strategies, vocabulary, scaffolding, modeling, and skills based approaches are used. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? This is done by the provider. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Instructional focus is on creating clear coherent instruction, as well as academic instruction for SIFE. b. N/A c. Multiple entry points are used for developing ELLs. d. Collaborative activities, use of home language and culture when possible. Explicit literacy instruction. e. Content vocabulary support, reading and writing strategies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Visuals, audio, manipulative and realia are used along with literacy strategies and graphic organizers. IEP accommodations are adhered to. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school has small classroom sizes that max at 25 students per class with at least two teachers in the classroom to provide the necessary support for student success. Each class is scheduled according to the need of the students', the classes are also longer, which, allows students time to utilize the multiple entry points, interventions, and strategies that are developed for their success. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ESL/ELL specialist uses the San Diego Quick Test to assess students' reading levels in English and implement a program for the school year. We then utilize SIOP and Literacy strategies to differentiate for students in the four content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? BDA is currently implementing lesson study, which allows teachers to implement interventions and refine teaching practice to support our ELL population and other students in need. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including ELL's are encouraged to participate in the Boys/Girls Basketball Program, Cheerleading/Dance Team, Animation Project, Art Club, and Theatre Group. 2018-19 CEP 55  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers are instructed on the implementation of SIOP, RTI2, and Interactive Literacy Strategies to support ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries and staff are employed where applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services provided are based on students' needs. BDA is a transfer school, which means that we do not service students according to grade levels, but on their academic needs for credit accumaltion, testing and college. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teachers are instructed on the implementation of SIOP, RTI2, and Interactive Literacy Strategies to support ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). BDA accept students on a rolling basis throughout th year. Our ESL/ELL specialist runs ats reports every two weeks , the RLER, RLAT, and RNMR, to determine if recently admitted students are ELLs. Based on their needs students are programmed by the school/advocate counselor, parents are informed of services by the parent coordinator, and the ELL specialist creates a language program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish Culture is offered to our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL specific professional development are attended, along with literacy strategy PD. Teachers of ELL students are offered ongoing ELL, SIOP, and Literacy professional development in and out the school building. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 56  Literacy and testing strategies are focused on for incoming ELLs. BDA has professional development provided every Tuesday and Thursday. Each meeting has an agenda, attendance sheet, and resources to support development that is kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited by the parent coordinator to workshops that are geared towards them and their needs, they are also invited to parent meetings throughout the school year to discuss their child's progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Currently BDA hosts workshops, multicultural days, meet the teacher, curriculum night, PTA meetings, etc. to foster involvment. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dez-Ann Romain, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Democracy Academy School DBN: 23K643 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Andrew Brown Title Principal Dez-Ann Romain Assistant Principal Khadijah Allen Parent Coordinator Paul Micca ENL/Bilingual Teacher Crystal Orange Parent Patricia Sanon Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Jane Spielman Coach Coach Siobhan Morris School Counselor Donald Conyers Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 10/1/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23 School Name: Brooklyn Democracy Academy Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Shayna Hargraves ELL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Brooklyn Democracy Academy uses the Home Language Identification Survey and information from the ELL Parent Orientation, and the RAPL ATS screen to determine the translation services needs of our students and parents. After we have identified the languages, other than English that are spoken at home, we survey staff members to ascertain if they can serve as interpreters and assist the school with communications. If needed, we will ask the DOE Translation Services department to provide us with interpreters to assist with parent outreach with families that speak other languages. We will also use the DOE translation services, if needed, to translate important documents, notices and information packets for parents and students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 60  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral After reviewing our data, we found that this year we need to translate documents and notices into Spanish, Haitian Creole, and Urdu. The secretary and/or guidance counselor will forward the necessary documents to the DOE translation services. We will also arrange for interpreters during parent meetings, Parent/Teacher conferences and Open House events. Staff members as well as DOE Translation Services will be utilized as interpreters when needed. Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable English 98 English 98 Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents we disseminate during the year are parent-teacher conference announcements, after school program information, New York State testing dates, progress reports, report cards, permission slips for trips and after Ongoing Print in native and preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 61  school tutoring, and Saturday regents prep. Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher nights, individual parent conferences, ELL parent meetings. Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Ongoing Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable interpretation service(s)? Print in native and preferred language. Provide a translator if necessary. Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. BDA has staff members that are Bi/tri-lingual that can communicate with our population. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Informing families during workshops, open houses, etc. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 62  Our school provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language, and who require language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, and a copy of the. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages. We also include a copy of the Parents' Guide to Language Access in the preferred home language. The multilingual Welcome Poster is on display by the front office with contact information for the school coordinator listed. Language ID guides are on display in the main office and guidance offices. All posters and documents are from the DOE Intranet School Support page T&I Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will issue a parent survey for parents to get feedback and address any questions or concerns regarding language access at our school. 2018-19 CEP 63 
