2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K670 School Name: BENJAMIN BANNEKER ACADEMY Principal: KINSLEY KWATENG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Benjamin Banneker High School 331300011670 9-12 77 Clinton Avenue Brooklyn NY 11205 School Number (DBN): 13K670 718-793-3702 Phone Number: 718-797-3862 Fax: Wanda James WJames4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Kinsley Kwateng Staci Vaughn Nadine Marques C'coraThomas Nadine Marques Ajayi Browne Autumn Ford n/a District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110 Brooklyn, NY 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7184554635 Phone Number: 7187973862 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189353954 Phone Number: n/a Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KinsleyKwateng Staci Vaughn Nadine Marques Wanda James Betty King Autumn Ford Ajayi Browne *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rozelle Castillo Simone Elocke Theresa Gilkes C’Cora Thomas Gail Muhammad John LaCroix Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Staff Member/Student Member/Student Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? EMPOWER, MOTIVATE, COLLABORATE, INTEGRATE, INNOVATE, EXCELLENCE & LEGACY 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Benjamin Banneker Academy is a community-based school that seeks to provide opportunities for students to attend competitive colleges, graduate college and career ready and become citizen leaders through high academic expectations, individualized support and guidance, a holistic, family approach, our African theme, and by leveraging our numerous partners and programs. Our school has developed numerous partnerships to provide unique and meaningful opportunities to our student body. These partners include New York University, Brooklyn Plaza Medical, the STEAM program through Brooklyn Navy Yard, Long Island University, New York Cares, Medgar Evers among others. Among our special initiatives for 2017-18 is increasing the number of AP courses offered within the school from 9 to 14. We are also enhancing our approach to enrollment in AP courses and tutoring/support for students in AP courses. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Among our student population, we have a significant population of students with IEPs who require varied, specific supports to aid their learning process and socio-emotional well being. In addition, we have students for which English is their second language who receive academic support within their core content area classes. Our community also includes students who reside in temporary housing who are provided with counseling, academic assistance and school supplies. Lastly, we have students who have recently entered the United States from abroad and benefit from academic and socio-emotional support as they transition to New York City. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on data from the 2017-2018 school year we have made progress in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and establishing a Supportive Environment evidenced by the expansion of our college partnerships and Advanced placement courses; as well as the improvement in graduation rates. College partnerships 19 Advanced Placement Courses Improvement in passing rates: June graduation rate was 96%   August graduation rate will be 99%  LOTE 97% passing rate Area of Focus: Our focus for the 2018-19 school year is to continue to build rigorous instruction that will promote academic achievement, through college readiness courses, and partnerships. We will achieve this by in creasing the use our technology in the classroom and providing professional development to staff in various areas as detailed below: Improve student examination performance on Advanced Placement courses  Enhance the rigor and instruction in all classes, including Advanced Placement courses.   Using Google Classroom  Provide college tours for all our scholars  Increase the number of students achieving college readiness standards (college readiness index is currently 51%, 19% below comparison group average) and Advanced Regents diplomas. 2018-19 CEP 10   Through our college partnerships that we have established there should be an annual 10-15% increase in our college readiness index over the next four years.  Expansion of college courses in 2018-2019 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K670 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 844 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 20 7 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 13 4 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 63.5% % Reduced Lunch 0.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 11.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.23 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 94% 87.6% 17.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 48 46 87.2% 4.9% 14.8% 81.3% 4.3% 2.1% 4 17% 10.2 N/A N/A 94% 92% 95.8% 33% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Celebration:  Instructional walkthroughs, implemented as a weekly practice during first semester and occurring 3-4 times a week during the second semester, coupled with specific, actionable feedback improved rigorous instruction during the 2017-8 school year. In addition, a template for feedback (glows, grows, next step) was introduced in the Spring of 2016 to provide non-evaluative feedback for classroom visits lasting less than fifteen minutes.  Teachers were grouped strategically, based on need and capacity, for a Monday professional learning series aimed at enhancing rigor in classroom, specifically through improved instructional strategies as related to Domain 3 of the Danielson Rubric.  Teachers participated in regular professional learning sessions, as a staff, as well as department meetings aimed at increasing rigor. A professional learning session was provided, for example, in which teachers unwrapped Next Generation Standards collaboratively and developed proficient lesson objectives in content-specific collaborative teams. Focus:  During 2018-19, BBACD will focus on the following areas as a means to further developing rigorous instruction in all classes and classrooms: o Continue and build on practices developed during 2018-19 including classroom walkthroughs, professional learning series and use of Danielson Framework. o Through strategic professional learning from LINC and TEQ, teachers will implement important technological strategies to improve student learning experiences and outcomes. o Student Centered Learning Techniques: Through inter visitations, teacher facilitated professional learning and administrative facilitated professional learning, teachers will be introduced to, rehearse and reflect on student centered learning techniques that can be turn-keyed for use in the classroom. The focus of these techniques will be to shift instructional practice in classrooms to enhance student voice, based in discussion or writing, and for the teacher to act as the facilitator rather than the individual who delivers content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will provide actionable feedback to students in class and on student work products as evidenced by low inference data from informal, formal observations and instructional walkthroughs. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Co-planning sessions for ICT team teachers, to be scheduled for no less than twice weekly. Depth of Knowledge activities guide and Expeditionary Learning protocols are some of the instructional strategies that will be implemented to service the needs fo SWD's and ELL's. Vertical and horizontal co-planning for content and grade teachers Pedagogical Staff Professional Learning, both Administrative and Teacher-facilitated, focused on Student Centered Learning Strategies reinforced by inter-visitations and specific, actionable feedback Pedagogical Staff Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ICT Teachers and classrooms Sept - Nov 2018 Administrative Team, Special Education Coordinator, Co-teachers Administrative Team, Instructional Cabinet Administrative Team and Instructional Cabinet Feb-Mar 2019 Apr-May 2019 Sept - Nov 2018 Feb-Mar 2019 Apr-May 2019 Stemming from 5 Professional Learning Sessions Sept - April 2018-19, Instructional Technology facilitated by LINC and TEQ Pedagogical Staff Sept 2018 LINC and TEQ June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September to June of 2019 students and families will receive meaningful, actionable feedback from teachers to support them in making incremental improvements to their work. BBACD's admin team, teaching staff and guidance 2018-19 CEP 15  team will support parents and families in understanding how to receive and utilize this feedback through town halls, parent teacher conferences and written communication. Although our focus for Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core for 2018-19 is effective feedback, we will also communicate our essential elements within this area using the methods provided above. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Model teachers are used to demonstrate best practices. Per Session will be provided to Lead teachers within each department to Fair Student Funding allocated for IO Education Skedula   Dedication of Administrative team's time to support initiatives as well as professional learning time to lesson study and high leverage pedagogical strategies and Danielson Framework. Limited professional development budget for outside training.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By the end of January 2019, the administrative team will monitor teacher engagement in the lesson study process in collaborative teams. Data will be compared to see the effectiveness of collaboration on student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Informal and formal observations by the administrative team as well as data analysis of the January 2019 Regents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Celebration:  Presence/impact of student voice through Student Government & freshmen, sophomore, junior and senior committees  Tutoring and Saturday Regents Prep support student understanding  College partnerships with NYU, SUNY Stony Broook, Medgar Evers, Long Island University, Monroe College.  College and career readiness opportunities that allow students to explore post-secondary careers, such as Brooklyn Navy Yard internship. Focus: Improved pedagogy to support students with individual needs, including students with IEPs   Enhancing tutoring programs for struggling students  Co-teachers participate in the same lesson study teams.    AP Capstone Special education teachers are teaching in their content area of expertise. Strategic programming to support special education students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, the percentage of special education and English language learners earning 10 plus credits will increase by 5 percent as compared to data from 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). CO-teaching professional learning:  5/30/10 teaching model  Multiple Entry Point Activities  Universal Design for Learning Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Co-teaching Teams Oct - Dec 2018 Administration Special Education Coordinator Lesson Study: Focus on instructional improvement and providing multiple entry point activities aimed and improving the academic performance of special education students through collaborative lesson planning, inter-visitation and debriefing. Weekly attendance meetings focus on at -risk students in special education to engage parents/guardians through outreach (via phone, text and/or electronically) and provide incentives for attendance improvement. All Teachers Oct -Dec 2018 Administration and Department Heads At-risk Students Sept - June 2018-19 Attendance Team S.I.T. meeting to target special education students and provide support and resources. Special Education Students Sept - June 2018-19 S.I.T. Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June of 2019:  Parent & Family Workshops (no less than quarterly) designed by Guidance Team, Special Education Team, and content-based teams  Ongoing and consistent updates and outreach via Pupilpath/Skedula and IO Education platform (throughout year); Admin Team, Guidance, Teaching staff  Academic, service-oriented, and socio-emotional based events within and beyond school hours (monthly) in conjunction with PTA and community based organizations 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Hiring and aligning of special education teachers to their specific content areas  Review of patterns and trends from 2018-19 to improve systems in place  Time and resources provided for professional learning and collaborative teaming sessions  After school and Saturday budgets to target and support special education students  Training and development of special education and general education teachers in best practices to support special education students, including high performing ICT classrooms Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the administration will monitor by conducting transcript reviews to ascertain whether special education students are on track. By the end of January a ten percent increase in students earning five credits in the first semester will indicate progress toward our goal. Additional measures will include one-on-one conferencing, teacher feedback and scholarship reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Transcript reviews Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Celebration: As per our Quality Review school community made strategic organizational decisions to support the schools instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. Focus: 2018-2019: (Per Quality Review)  Utilization of Lesson Study with an emphasis on grade level as a means to improve instruction and boost student achievement through teacher collaboration (4.2) o Define norms and goals o Schedule and plan a research lesson as a team o Team observes one teacher deliver the lesson, shadowing an individual student in the process (1.2) o Team debriefs lesson, utilizing individual “shadow” students as a lens o Team reflect on process and the process re-starts. Each teacher delivers two lessons before the process restarts with another team member. (1.2)   Strategic and structured co-planning for teachers team teaching in ICT classrooms Strategic and structured horizontal and vertical co-planning for teachers based on student population and content areas  Continue to build and improve the practice of teacher facilitated professional learning  Co-teaching and co-planning: To shift instructional practice to an ICT model, we will provide professional learning opportunities and regular co-planning sessions for pairs of content-specific teachers and special educators. In addition, we will move to limit ICT partnerships to no more than two per special educator, allowing teachers to forge trust and chemistry as co-teachers. Based on these adjustments, we will hold teachers to a standard of a true ICT co-teaching model where both teachers facilitate, provide feedback, differentiate and lead equally. In addition, we will enhance vertical and horizontal co-planning for content and grade teachers to develop instructional prowess and planning for multiple entry points, differentiation and multiple paths of inquiry within all lessons. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 20  1. By June 2019, 75% of all scholars would have achieved college readiness benchmarks as per requirements from the NYSED. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrative facilitated workshops for department heads on structuring and facilitating lesson study for lesson study teams. Department Heads Sept - June 2018-19 Administration All Teachers Sept - Oct Administration 2018 Danielson Framework differentiated professional learning for improved instructional capacity:  Planning and preparation  Classroom Environment   Professional Responsibilities Instruction Parent workshops focused on: Instructional process and outcome. Skedula communication between teachers and parents  Quality Review document and process.    College application process  Supporting a student-athlete and a scholar Quarterly administration and PTA executive meetings to focus on:  Aligning school and community resources for students academic and social and emotional improvement.  Aligning school and community resources in supporting teachers instructional and leadership capacity. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Sept - June 2018-19 Administration, Guidance and Parent Coordinator Students, Teachers 8/29, 9/26, 10/24, 11/28 and....... Administration and PTA executive committee. 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School leadership works directly with the PTA Executive Board through summer planning sessions and monthly meetings to ensure teacher-parent collaborations are meaningful and systematic. Teachers utilize time weekly to conduct parent outreach and also utilize IO Education to keep parents updated regarding the progress of their child. Interventions for struggling students are handled through these partnerships with guidance facilitating planning sessions and academic supports to ensure student growth. Schoolwide events, such as workshops, town halls and academic nights are held to strengthen these ties and provide opportunities for meaningful interaction between all school stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrative time dedicated to lesson study planning and execution  Department Head sessions dedicated to lesson study planning and execution  Extensive time allocations to support pedagogical staff engaging in lesson study process   Funding allotted to purchase and produce lesson study resources Leveraging expertise of partner schools to enhance lesson study practices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, all teachers will be engaging in the lesson study process in collaborative teams. No less than 60% of teachers will have delivered a research lesson. 90% of teachers will have observed a research lesson and provided feedback to their colleagues. 100% of teachers will have collaborated in planning a research lesson. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Google Drive files containing Research Lessons, Lesson & Meeting schedules and feedback from collaborative teacher team  Collaborative Teacher Team Meeting Agendas  Collaborative Teacher Team Meeting Minutes  Observation and Low Inference of Collaborative Teacher Team Meetings  Observation Reports of Research Lessons  Email Correspondence Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths (As per Quality Review):  Created and identify student centered clubs and programs to address students' academic and socio-emotional needs, including gender-based mentoring and community service (1.4)  Build leadership capacity of teachers and staff by providing access to high leverage teams/collaboration (1.4) Needs (As per Quality Review):  Continue to enhance use of the observation and feedback cycle to improve instruction and student outcomes, especially consistency and quality of feedback (1.2)  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, all teachers will align assessments to curricula, use on going assessment and grading practices,as evidence through informal and formal observations, instructional walkthroughs and the creation of a common Midterm Exam. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted professional learning focused on student centered teaching models and strategies; connections to Danielson Framework Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept-June 2018-19 Administrative Team, PD Committee Instructional Walkthroughs with a specific lens aligned to domain 3 of the Danielson framework All Teachers Sept-June Administrative Team After each cycle of Advance observation, the administrative team will engage in a reflective process (needs assessment) to identify areas of growth for instruction to inform future professional learning and lesson study goals. 2018-19 Department Leads All Teachers November Administrative Team 2018; January, March, April 2019 Administrative facilitated professional learning with a focus on: differentiation, support and scaffolding for students in sub-groups, Quality review, instructional focus, college and career readiness and IO Education Parents Oct-May Administrative Team 2018-19 Parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September to June 2019: -Ongoing dialogue through parent town halls and electronic communication regarding college and career readiness standards (Admin Team, Guidance) no less than quarterly -Ensure guidance and pedagogical staff is sharing emphasis on collaborative learning and group-focused activities so parents can facilitate supporting their children in meeting these expectations outside of school -Use of PTA Executive Board monthly sessions as an additional conduit to sharing new initiatives and patterns & trends Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. IO Education   Time allotted to communicate with PTA Executive Board and parents/families generally  Google Based system in place to enhance school wide communication  Time allotted 3-5 times weekly to engage in Administrative Team walkthroughs  Time allotted for each Administrator to conduct multiple Advance observations weekly, with specific, actionable feedback provided within 2 business days  Creation and modification of online systems to track observations and data resulting from observations to identify trends and patterns Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the administration will monitor the progress of Advance observations. By the end of January 2019 administrators will meet monthly to report on the effectiveness of actionable feedback to improve teachers instructional capacity. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Advance data tools by school wide teaching staff and individual teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Celebration (Per Quality Review): School communicates its expectations through multiple ways, student handbook, posting throughout the building, on the school website, and via email messages and text messages through pupilpath and io messenger . Parents are provided with resources to support their children. For example, workshops on the financial aid process and application completion. Focus (Per Quality Review): to provide more opportunities for parents to be more engaged in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be 5 percent increase in parental participation in school wide activities as evidenced attendance/ Sign In sheets from workshops, conferences, and teacher/staff log entries of individual outreach to parents. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Clubs and co-curricular: School culture and School Spirit Week; College Fair; Annual Career Day Students & Parents September – June 2018-19 Administration, Guidance, SAPIS Curriculum Fair; Science Fair Workshops for parents on the IEP process and modification Parents Community May-June 2019 Teachers Members Parents Community Members Sept 2018 February Special Education Director 2019 Epiphany Blue Facilitated Parent Workshops: Anxiety and stress management Parents Nov 2018 Epiphany Blue June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brooklyn Plaza Medical New York Cares Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation Various local and regional college partnerships Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Time is allotted for staff and students to plan and prepare for events individually and in teams   Time and resources allotted for training and setup of Skedula and Rubicon Atlas Forums provided for parental and community feedback Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the administration will monitor parent engagement. By the end of January 2019, administration and PTA executive board will meeting monthly report on effectiveness of programs to increase parent engagement by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from parent and school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After School Programs 3-6pm, Saturday Academy, Saturday 9 to 9s Small group instruction; Additional scaffolding; Tutoring After-school (Tuesday through Friday) and Saturdays. After school and Saturday programs run from October to June After School Programs 3-6pm; Saturday Academy; Saturday 9 to 9s; Small group instruction; Additional scaffolding; Tutoring After-school (Tuesday through Friday) and Saturdays. After school and Saturday programs run from October to June Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted or inability to attain a passing grade on previous progress report Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Failure to pass ELA Regents Teacher recommendations 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted or inability to attain a passing grade on previous progress report Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Failure to pass Algebra Regents Teacher recommendations 2018-19 CEP 30  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted or inability to attain a passing grade on previous progress report Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Failure to pass LE Regents Teacher recommendations 20% to 50% less credits earned than the attempted or inability to attain a passing grade on previous progress report Class attendance ranging from 70% to 90% Failure to pass US History or Global History Regents Teacher recommendations Students with attendance, academic, social, behavioral and emotional issues as determined by teachers, support staff, guidance counselors, COSAsincluding: After School Programs 3-6pm; Saturday Academy; Saturday 9 to 9s; Small group instruction; Additional scaffolding; Tutoring After-school (Tuesday through Friday) and Saturdays. After school and Saturday programs run from October to June After School Programs 3-6pm; Saturday Academy; Saturday 9 to 9s; Small group instruction; Additional scaffolding; Tutoring After-school (Tuesday through Friday) and Saturdays. After school and Saturday programs run from October to June Small groups; one-to-one. During school day, especially during lunch, after school Small group sessions, one on one conferences with guidance, empowerment or meeting groups, college and career readiness sessions, socio-emotional or academic support sessions with guidance or student affairs team 2018-19 CEP 31  Below 80% attendance during any school month Failing more than 3 classes in a semester Lack of credit accumulation overall Failing 1 -2 Regents during school year Frequent anecdotals in Skedula for behavior or socio-emotional support needed 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 50 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services provided to students in the STH population include counselling, academic supports during and after school, and school supplies to ensure equity in opportunity for learning. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title 1 school 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The administration will actively recruit through interviews and recruitment events and meets one-on-one each week to provide support and hear feedback from teachers about needed support. Hosting Teaching Fellows program for their summer intensive and gathering insight from current teachers with regards to quality candidates to interview will be utilized as well. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. In addition, the staff has incorporated the use of binders, school agendas, Cornell Notes, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, and Common Core Aligned Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The targeted assistance Title I is used in coordination with baseline funding to supplement and not supplant baseline materials and personnel. The targeted assistance Title I funding will be used to purchase supplemental instructional materials for identified students and to split fund the position of Social Worker who spends part of their day working with identified students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local $493,696 X 2018-19 CEP 36 Column B Section Reference(s) Sections5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 37   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K670, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 13K670 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K670, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Benjamin Banneker Borough Brooklyn School Number 670 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kinsley Kwateng Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Francesca Freeman-Lujan Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kinard /Spanish Teahcer Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal John LaCroix Coach School Counselor Isaiah Cherry Parent Parent Coordinator Ms. Wanda James Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 46  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 928 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.29% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher created assessments in conjuction to the MOSL baseline assessment are used assess literacy skills so that teachers can identify learning gaps and lesson plan accordingly. Teachers are able to identify the student strengths and weaknesses in the areas of: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Based on the data teachers will be able to share best practices during grade level and departmental meetings to improve student performance. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 47  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the end of each marking period we will review the ELLs data so as to see if they are meeting AYP in addition to making sure that they are provided additional academic intervention services to support their overall performance. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. There are 11 students who are currently at the Advance Level and Intermediate level. In addition, we have one student that is emerging. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We look the data, share and discuss with staff during PD. In addition, we strategically program students to mee their needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. NYSESLAT indicates that the students are intermediate and advance therefore requiring minutes of service a week in ELA and or another content area by a K-12 certified teacher in ESOL. However we do not have the personell on staff to provide such services nonetheless we are seeking to collaborate and partner with schools in the community to meet the ELL population needs. Furthermore we have an extensive academic intervention service that offers students tutorial services in all core classes during the academic week as well as on Saturdays. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? NYSESLAT indicates that the students are intermediate and advance therefore requiring minutes of service a week in ELA and or another content area by a K-12 certified teacher in ESOL. However we do not have the personell on staff to provide such services nonetheless we are seeking to collaborate and partner with schools in the community to meet the ELL population needs. Furthermore we have an extensive academic intervention service that offers students tutorial services in all core classes during the academic week as well as on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP 48  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The mode of instruction is English in all content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? NA 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Based on the ELL levels teachers provide multiple entry points into the lesson including but not limited to graphic organizers, CLOZE activities, call and response and various annotation techniques. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The various instructional strategies and grade level materials that the teachers will use are but not limited to: underlining for understanding, annotation, depth of knowledge questioning techniques, graphic organizers, and Cornell note taking method 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Benjamin Banneker Academy uses after school tutoring to support English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Afterschool tutoring and Saturday Academy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Creating an ELL academy that meets monthly to support students progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in all after school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All students have access to technology so as to enhance overall learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Benjamin Banneker ensures that home language support is provided via parent notification letters with support from attendance coordinator, the ELL coordinator, the testing coordinator and the parent coordinator to support parent notification. 2018-19 CEP 49  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Benjamin Banneker ensures that all required services/resources support and corresponding to ELLs ages and grade levels through the guidance counselor based on the NYSESLAT results and Common Core learning standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All students have acess to technology so as to enhance overall learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). NA we do not have any newly enrolled ELLs 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Benjamin Banneker offers Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We will seek support from Brooklyn North Field Support Center and whenever possible send the appropriate personnel to scheduled professional development. Teachers will implement the CCLS according to the core subject area and will be encouraged to seek additional support from the BNFSC based on the professional development workshop. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff are given the time to discuss best practices by grade and by content during scheduled professional development. The staff uses this as a resource to develop their lesson plans. The staff uses 25% of their scheduled PD time to address the needs of diverse learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 50  Benjamin Banneker holds grade meetings at the beginning of each semester to inform and discuss student performance and goals to meet AYP in relation to core curriculum instruction. In addition,teachers conduct parent outreach on Tuesday from 2:35-3:15 at this time teachers communicate with parents and if necessary, we also utilize the over the phone translation services 718-752-7373 to speak with parents. This time is utilized to inform and improve academic achievement. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are encouraged to get involved in school activities included but not limited to: grade meetings,parent workshops on CCLS, IEP meetings, SLT, celebratory meetings, celebratory functions of students, athletic events and academic achievements. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kinsley Kwateng, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Benjamin Banneker School DBN: 13K670 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kinsley Kwateng Title Principal John LaCroix Assistant Principal Wanda James Parent Coordinator Francesca Freeman-Lujan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Denetra Kinard Teacher/Subject Area Karen Watts Ulubabova Torres Holmes Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brooklyn North Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/7/17 8/7/17 8/7/17 8/7/17 8/7/17 8/7/17 11/12/15 11/12/15 11/12/15 11/12/15 11/12/15 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13 School Name: K670 Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. There are currently 7 ELLS at Benjamin Banneker Academy High School. There are no parent requests in other than English Language, however we will reach out to the parents once again so as to confirm. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these services. Parent surveys are distributed in Bengali, Spanish, Mandarin, and Chinese as well as English as these are the identified home language of the 7 students. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages will be updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices. Parent Blue Cards are also updated regularly to keep parent language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by 2018-19 CEP 54  backpack or during parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language 99 percent of the school’s population reports English as the primary language.The school’s demographic is made available on the school’s official DOE website and is periodically reported in our school’s newsletter. The remaining 1 % requires that the language of communication for both written and oral communication is in Spanish and Mandarin. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents which are distributed to parents/guardians but require translations are: annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, NYS testing dates. Testing dates and calendars are provided as soon as they become available in order to allow How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 CEP 55  parent/guardians to prepare themselves as well as their children for upcoming events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Benjamin Banneker HS holds 4 parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in September, introduces parents to their children's new grade and provides curriculum information. The next three, held in November, March and June are focused on student progress and grades. If necessary, we also utilize the over the phone translation services 718-752-7373 to speak with parents. In addition to these meetings, a designated one to one parent conference will take place annually in order to provide updates on student progress as mandated by CR Part 154. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 56  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Benjamin Banneker has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Available Languages sheet is kept at the security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. At Benjamin Banneker the school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data ( ATS Reports, Blue Cards and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of service. We can obtain information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and availability of services we provide to parents and students. 2018-19 CEP 57 
