2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K682 School Name: THE ACADEMY OF TALENTED SCHOLARS Principal: JOSEPHIN SPORTELLAGIUSTO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 682 The Academy of Talented Scholars 332000010682 K – 5 50 Avenue P (718) 621- 2730 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 20K682 (718) 621-2735 Fax: Josephine Sportella-Giusto jsportellagiusto@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Josephine Sportella Giusto Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: FarrahFeygis Leslie Tulumello/ Sandy Chum Wu Stacy Butsikares NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Rm 401 Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 20 Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDe Govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, New York 11209 cwatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-5131 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Josephine Sportella Giusto Farrah Feygis Leslie Tulumello Nicole Catalano Pamela Mullin Stacy Butsikares Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erez Ziv Susan Chan Olsen Courtney Scott Richard Klein Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Academy Of Talented Scholars, our goal is to nurture personal talents and instill a passion for lifelong learning while inspiring all students to become productive and conscientious citizens. We believe in establishing strong partnerships between parents and the community in order to enhance student learning and experiences. In a safe and supportive environment, all students will achieve academic, social and emotional success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Academy of Talented Scholars (TAOTS) is a unique school that originated from our founding principal’s vision of creating a community where students, parents and staff are valued and respected while committed to children achieving high academic success. We opened our doors in 2009 beginning with three kindergarten classes and three first grade classes. TAOTS is an elementary school located in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn and currently serves 392 students from kindergarten through grade 5. Since 2009, TAOTS has added a grade each year up until our first fifth grade graduating class in 2013. Our school serves students in general education, special education and English Language Learners. The student body includes 10.9% English Language Learners and 28.57% special education students of which 54.46% are classified with autism. In 2010, the NYC Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Nest program was piloted in one inclusion kindergarten classroom. Since then the ASD Nest Program has grown each year and currently there are two ASD Nest classrooms in each grade in grades K – 5. In addition, we were selected to house the only Intensive Kindergarten class in Brooklyn, a precursor to our ASD Nest Kindergarten. Students are selected through the NYC Student Enrollment Management System. TAOTS is a choice school in our district where admission is based on lottery. Students in our NEST program are selected through a process which includes collaboration with the Central ASD Nest office along with observations performed by our school’s NEST Team. The ASD Nest Program is the New York City Department of Education’s Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) program for higher functioning children with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The ASD Nest program helps children with ASD learn how to function well academically, behaviorally, and socially in school and in their community. The goal is to provide a therapeutic environment and supports within a grade- appropriate academic environment. The entire school embraces positive behavioral support. Each classroom has two teachers with training in the specialized curricula and instructional strategies used in the program. School leadership has offered this specialized training for all teachers. These instructional strategies help to foster relationship development, adaptive skills, language and communication and sensory/motor development thus minimizing the number of supports needed for these children outside the classroom. At P.S. 682 our educational philosophy centers around nurturing the whole child academically, behaviorally and socially while instilling a passion for lifelong learning and developing personal talents. We believe in the importance of inspiring all students to become productive and conscientious citizens. TAOTS provides a creative learning environment that fosters respect, confidence, and critical thinking skills through Inquiry and Project-based learning. We incorporate the Schoolwide Enrichment Model of education. Our Enrichment Clusters (EC) based on Joseph Renzulli’s Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM) continues to be our most unique feature. The SEM enables all children to explore their innate interests and discover individual areas of expertise. This is accomplished through small self-selected interest based groups on each grade level that are guided by teachers in collaboration with parent volunteers and community members. For the past 10 years we have planned for 3, 9-10 week cycles of these clusters so that children will have a broad range of experiences with different interest based opportunities. Our ECs provide a hands-on approach to learning in an area of interest. Every year new clusters are added in diverse topics covering the arts, team sports, journalism, dancing, health fields, science, math and various hobbies/careers. Additionally, TAOTS has partnerships with many exceptional arts programs such as Theater and Dancing Academy (TADA) to cultivate a well-rounded child. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school serves students in general education, special education and English Language Learners. The student body includes 10.9% English Language Learners and 28.57% special education students of which 54.46% are classified with autism. We support students with autism through the ASD Nest program that we offer. The program helps children with ASD learn how to function well academically, behaviorally, and socially in school and in their community. The 2018-19 CEP 10  goal is to provide a therapeutic environment and supports within a grade- appropriate academic environment. The entire school embraces positive behavioral supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework that our school has made the most progress in this year is in Strong Family Community Ties. We will continue to offer families many and various opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating activities with their child. Staff members will continue to work closely with all families to support all students at TAOTS. In addition, there has been a strong outreach campaign for families to participate or take roles in our Parent Teacher Organization (PTO) as this will continue in moving forward for this year. Our key areas of focus for 2018-2019 are Collaborative Teaching and Rigorous Instruction. We will continue to support Collaborative Teaching and Rigorous Instruction in order to raise our student's levels of achievement as well as increase the state test scores in Mathematics and ELA in grades 3-5. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K682 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 378 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 6 19 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 38.0% % Attendance Rate 31.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 13.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 60.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 83.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 79 79 19 95.3% 6.1% 27.8% 5.0% 19.8% 1.3% 0 0% 6.4 67.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The data from the 2017-2018 NYS Math exam revealed that overall P.S. 682 did significantly better (67%) than the city average (42.7%) on this exam; however, scores on the NYS Math exam revealed a decrease in the number of students scoring at levels 3 and 4 from the previous year (70.0%-67.0%). It also has been noted that 38.88% (14) of our Students with Special Needs currently in grades 4 and 5, scored below benchmark at Levels 1 or 2. Of our ENL students (4), 50.0% scored at or above benchmark at Levels 3 or 4 in grade 3. One (1) student that is an ENL student in grade 4 and one (1) student in grade 5 also double dip in the subgroup of Students with Special Needs. Of these 2 students, 1 student falls below benchmark as the other student opted out of testing. After a careful analysis, it was noted that there was a drop (74.0%-69.0%) in our general education students primarily in grades 4 and 5 at Levels 3 and 4. The third grade general education students; however, scored significantly better at levels 3 and 4(89.58%) than the 4th(55%) and 5th grade (60.46%) in levels 3 and 4. For this reason, our school will be focused on continuing to achieve and move all of our Level 1 and 2 students including general education, students with special needs and our English as a new language students in math this year.. After reviewing the data from our Item Skills Analysis from the 2018 NYS Math exam, alongside our math curriculum we have found that our instruction in grades 3-5 needed to be more tightly aligned to the NYS CCLS. We have switched our math program from Math in Focus to Investigations 3 to better align our math curriculum and increase students' mastery of conceptual knowledge. Our 2018 Math exam scores show that 67% of our students have scored at levels 3 & 4; however, there was a decrease (3.0%) of students in levels 3 & 4 from 2017. It is noted that there is a need to raise our student achievement in specific skills. The data from the Item Skills Analysis reveals that more rigorous targeted instruction still needs to occur in the area of fractions and the foundational skills of multiplication. The 2017-2018 summative feedback received from the Principal Performance Review MOLP indicates that our next steps would be to continue to build more opportunities for students to engage in collaborative activities and discussions in all integrated co teaching classrooms (ICT). We will continue to devote professional learning to support our teachers around inquiry work and establish a strong vertical team, to look at our trends in mathematics and ways to build strong coherence in all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019, all students, including Students with Disabilities and our English Language Learners who exist in the testing grades grades (3-5) will show a 3% increase in mathematics as measured by summative math assessments and the NYS Math assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development and inquiry study groups will provide opportunities for teachers to expand their knowledge of instructional strategies and methodologies to raise the students’ level of mathematical conceptual knowledge and fluency as well as differentiate instructional plans in this content area. Grades K-5 We will look at our data from our inquiry groups as well as data from our vertical planning group every 6 weeks to re-evaluate and see areas of progress and areas that need to be revisited. 9/8/18 – 6/26/19 Every 6 weeks Data Specialist, Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Metamorphosis Staff Developers, Classroom Teachers, IEP teacher Continued support will be provided for teachers in analyzing and utilizing data from formative and summative assessments to guide instruction for our lowest 1/3 and students with disabilities. Grades K-5 Benchmarks- Data Specialist, Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Metamorphosis Staff Developers, Classroom Teachers, IEP teacher 9/28/18 11/14/18 1/25/19 3/29/19 6/11/19 Workshops at each grade level will be presented to parents on various mathematics topics throughout the year as well as a Mathematics Test workshop for parents. Grades K-5 Monthly Assistant Principal Presentations from Data Specialist, Intervention services in Mathematics will be provided in an after school program - Project Math, for all of our level 1 and level 2 students in grades 2-5, including students with Disabilities and our English Language Learners using specific intervention 9/8/18 – 6/26/19 Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Classroom Teachers Grades K-5 November- SETSS Teacher May 2018-19 CEP 15 resources to aid in developing deeper conceptual knowledge in mathematics comprehension and fluency. Multiple sources of information will be collected and used to assess student progress. An additional supplemental differentiated math period once a week for all grade 5 students will be implemented AIS Teachers, Classroom Teachers Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Assistant Principal Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 682 offers monthly parent meetings that help inform parents about their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. Teachers choose a monthly topic to share and discuss during parent engagement time. This helps parents deepen their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core. A NYS Math testing meeting is also offered to parents to explain the NYS exam as well as how to best prepare their child for the exam. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources-STEAM Specialist, Curriculum Specialist, Data Specialist, Classroom Teachers, SETSS Teacher, Metamorphosis Staff Developers, Teacher per session, Supervisor per session Instructional Resources – Professional Literature, Mentoring MInds Program, I-Ready Schedule adjustments- After school data meetings, After School -Project Math program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  By February 2019, (our midpoint benchmark), all students including our Students with Disabilities and our English Language Learners who exist within our testing grades (grades 3-5) will show a 1.5% increase in their conceptual knowledge and fluency in mathematics as measured by the NYS Math exam practice benchmark assessment as well as the formative benchmark assessment in Investigations 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measure will be the Investigations 3 summative and formative assessment as well as benchmark assessments from the Mentoring Minds program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We will continue to build and strengthen the TRIBES community building program in TAOTS. As a TRIBES community school, focusing on mutual respect and positive behavior, we will continue to educate our staff in order to have classrooms and a school where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers. After analyzing our School Survey, it has been noted that safety is a school strength relative to the Supportive Environment element. According to the School Survey in 2017-2018, 100% of teachers responded that they feel safe in their school community. 100% of our teachers say that school safety agents promote a safe and respectful environment at their school. 100% of teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria in their school. It is noted that 100% of all teachers believe that all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior or feelings). In the 2016 - 2017 school year, a teacher team was selected, trained and certified as Tribes Teacher Leaders, Trainers of Trainers (TOT). After successfully completing the certification program our trainers are now conducting staff professional development on incorporating and enhancing the TRIBES philosophy and community building into the classrooms/school community in 2018-2019 school year. Our priority needs for the school year 2018-2019 is to continue to support staff in creating an environment of positive behavior. According to the School Survey in 2017-2018, 73% of teachers responded that the students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. 90% of teachers feel that a lot or all of the students in their class do their work when they are supposed to, however, 71% of teachers say that students pay attention when they are supposed to. There is still more to do to continue to strengthen an environment of positive behavior. After assessing and discussing our TRIBES data, of which 239 students responses were analyzed, we noticed that 192 students can explain the TRIBES agreements, 12 students clearly did not understand the question and 29 students responded that they sometimes can explain the TRIBES agreements. In the 2018- 2019 school year, after professional development provided by the Tribes trainer, the School Leadership Team (SLT) in collaboration with TRIBES leaders and the Guidance Counselor, will revisit the TRIBES questions of the survey and will administer the survey three times a year ( December, March and June), analyze and continue to strengthen our approach to culture building, discipline and socio-emotional support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 18  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in collaboration with our Guidance Counselor and TRIBES leaders and trainers, we will strengthen our school-wide TRIBES community building program which will show a 2% increase as evidence by the students positive responses to the agreements in our TRIBES survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance Counselor, Tribes Facilitator, Tribes Trainers and Grade Level Leaders will increase professional development and support in grades K – 5 in the area of community building for all students including those with disabilities, our lowest 1/3 and ELLs. K – 5 students Monthly from September to June 9/18 – 6/19 Tribes Facilitators, Tribes Trainers, Guidance Counselor, Grade Level Leaders Professional development will be provided to strengthen teachers and support staff's TRIBES knowledge on developing a caring school and classroom environment for all students including students with disabilities, our lowest 1/3 and ELLS. K – 5 students 10/ 29/18 11/7/18 4/19 6/19 The guidance counselor will develop and implement a school-wide Peer Mediation program training grade 4 and 5 students to monitor, address and resolve peer conflicts. This will include an intensive 3 day training, graduation of peer mediators and a monthly follow-up. K-5 students 10/18 -6/19 ASD Nest Coach, Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Assistant Principal Tribes Facilitators, Tribes Trainers, Guidance Counselor, Grade Level Leaders, ASD Nest Coach and Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Assistant Principal Guidance Counselors, ASD Nest Coach, Tribes Facilitators, Tribes Trainers Workshops such as our Parent Tribes Mixer as well as various other Tribes related workshops will be conducted by our Tribes Teacher Facilitators lead by our guidance counselor. Parents/ Guardians of K-5 students 10/ 18 Guidance Counselor 2/19 ASD Nest Coach 2018-19 CEP 20  5/19 Tribes Facilitators, Tribes Trainers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in the month of September, families will be invited every month to teacher lead parent workshops, Parent Mixers and/or various other Tribes related workshops that will be conducted by our Tribes Leaders, teachers and/or Guidance Counselor throughout the school year 2018-2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources- Guidance Counselor, ASD Nest Coach, STEAM Specialist, Curriculum Specialist, Tribes Facilitator, Assistant Principal Instructional Resources- Peer Mediation Program and Materials, Social Development Guidance Games, TRIBES Learning Community Manual Schedule Adjustments- Schedule changes to accommodate assemblies, peer mediation student, staff training and professional development sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the first week of March, our mid-point benchmark, we will engage in progress monitoring using the TRIBES Survey benchmarks to strengthen our school-wide TRIBES program which will show a 1% increase as evidenced by the students positive responses in our TRIBES survey. The assessments will be analyzed and the number of students with either basic or advanced collaborative skills will be noted. After the analysis of the data, there will be a review of school-wide, class wide, and individual TRIBES learning community plans that are in place. Based of this data review, modifications if necessary will be made. Continued professional development and support will be implemented to support the findings of the data in March. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be the TRIBES Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 682, The Academy of Talented Scholars continues to do well in our ELA State exam scores, with 83% of students scoring at levels 3 & 4. The collaborative work of the staff at P. S. 682 contributes to the success of our students' scores. At this time, after a review of the 2018 ELA exam's Item Skills Analysis, it has been noted that there is a disconnect for our Level 1 and 2 students between the students' performance in the reading (multiple choice questions) section and the writing from sources section (constructed response questions). Many of our students scored lower on the writing section of the ELA exam as compared to the reading section. After an analysis of our grade 3 and 4 students, it has been noted that of the six (6) short response questions in grade 3, an average of 37% of the students scored below benchmark on this section and in grade 4, an average of 43% of our students scored below benchmark. Of the 1 extended response question, an average of 16% of our grade 3 students scored below the benchmark and an average of 38% of our grade 4 students scored below benchmark. Although this is the writing portion of the ELA exam, it is measuring students' comprehension of the text and the ability to write from sources. Reading workshop is utilized in all classrooms, at this time there is a need to tighten some workshop practices and components so there is solid consistency across all grades K-5 in all classes for all students, including students with disabilities, ENL students and our students performing in our lowest 1/3. TAOTS will continue to study students writing from sources and using textual evidence to support answers , not only to increase our students' writing levels as they relate to reading comprehension, but to also allow teacher teams to deepen their practice around writing assessment and feedback in this area of constructed and extended response. Summative feedback from the 2016-2017 Principal Performance Review indicates that our data inquiry team work is exemplary. Teachers will continue to use protocols and GOALBOOK to better service the need of all students. Teachers will continue to create and use teacher created resources to drive instruction forward for all students, including English Language learners and students with disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of all students, including Students with Special Needs and English Language Learners in grades 3-5 scoring a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam due to an increase in the constructed response. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Curriculum Specialist and TCRWP Staff Developers will provide support and professional development in the area of reading, differentiation and assessment with a focus on strengthening the reading workshop as well as aligning content area instruction with common core grade level standards and expectations for all students including students with disabilities, ENL and our lowest 1/3. Saturday program Project SMARTS will provide specific instruction in teaching comprehension strategies in reading and writing as well as test strategies and allow our teachers to work collaboratively. Instruction will be differentiated to meet the needs of our SWD, and ENL students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in all grades K-5 10/18 – 6/19 Curriculum Specialist, Monthly STEAM Specialist, Classroom Teachers Students in all grades 3-5 1/18-4/19 TCRWP Staff Developers Curriculum Specialist, Every Saturday STEAM Specialist, Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal Principal Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Classroom Teachers Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Teacher Led Parent workshops in the reading curriculum as well as ELA Test workshops will be held throughout the year to promote parental awareness of the requirements of the ELA exam as well as the demands of the CCLS in reading. Our school website will also provide updated video clips and parent communication in reading. Parents of students in all grades 3-5 Monthly starting in 10/18-6/19 Inquiry teams will study and deepen their practice of writing workshop by assessing student work and developing scaffolds and supports to meet the needs of all students including students with disabilities, ENL and our lowest 1/3. Students in all grades K-5 Starting in October every Monday 10/18-6/19 ASD Nest Coach TCRWP Staff Developers 2018-19 CEP 24  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September of 2018-2019 school year, classroom teachers, specialty teachers, service providers and academic coaches will continue to offer monthly Teacher Led workshops, to collaborate with parents on ways they can support their children at home. In addition, families are invited to the Big Night (STEAM/STEM, Math and Literacy family engagement, Enrichment Cluster digital showcase (May 2019), TRIBES mixers (October, February and March) and various curriculum based workshops to gain knowledge and access to certain parts of the curriculum and assessments to better support their children collaboratively with the principal and teachers. The Curriculum Specialist along with the Assistant Principal will host ELA testing workshops to inform our parents of the ELA exam and offer suggestions to help improve their student's constructed and extended responses on the exam. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Principal, Assistant Principal, Project SMARTS Supervisor per session , Curriculum Specialist, ASD Nest Coach, Teachers, Teachers - per session. Instructional Resources- Professional Literature, Mentoring Minds Student and Teacher materials, TC Reading and Writing Units of Study, Schedule Changes -Professional Development sessions, 1:1 Support with Curriculum Specialist . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our mid-point benchmark, we will engage in progress monitoring using student data from our CCLS aligned ELA Benchmark assessment as part of our overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. We will analyze and review the data, specifically of the students' constructed responses to determine if our students are on track with 2018-19 CEP 25  a 2.5% increase in their constructed responses to meet our annual goal and to continue to drive our instructional planning in reading. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress will be the CCLS aligned ELA Benchmark assessment as well as the NYS ELA exam. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our past data and according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, under the area of effective school leadership 73% of teachers reported that they felt supported in their team instructional planning by their principal ranging from " strongly agree to agree" while 27% disagreed. According to our 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review, Measures of Leadership Practice summative feedback, we continue to show strength in the quality indicator 1.2- Pedagogy. While our teaching practices are aligned to school beliefs and the Danielson Framework for Teaching, it is critical that our school leadership continues to grow and stay informed as to the most current instructional practices the staff is being professionally developed and supported in. This will create a strong level of support and alignment of current teaching practices between leadership and teachers, especially with strategies to work with our students with disabilities, our ESL and our students performing in the lowest 1/3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will participate in instructional planning and principal's professional learning communities in Mathematics to continue to support the teachers and staff as measured by a 3% increase in the number of students scoring at levels 3 and 4 on the 2019 NYS Mathematics exam. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will attend the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Principals as Curricular Leaders Series to continue to develop skills in leading and supporting the staff in their literacy practice. Grades K-5 Teachers, Support Staff The principal will attend and participate in Principal's professional learning communities with Metamorphosis to continue to develop skills in leading and supporting the staff in their mathematics practice. Grade k-5 Teachers 9/18 Principal, 11/18 1/19 3/19 5/19 6/19 9/18 10/18 11/18 Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Specialist, 12/18 STEAM Specialist, 1/19 2/19 3/19 4/19 5/19 6/19 The principal will participate in the Blue Ribbon Schools of Excellence Conference to continue to develop skills in leading and supporting the staff in best practices. Grades K-5 Teachers, Support Staff The principal will participate in various emotional based planning workshops to continue to develop skills in leading and supporting the staff. Parents of students in grades K-5 Nov 2018 Principal Principal, Guidance Counselor 10/18 2/19 5/19 2018-19 CEP 28  Parents will participate in various curriculum based workshops to gain knowledge and access to certain parts of the curriculum and assessments to better support their children collaboratively with the principal and teachers. Parents of students in grades K-5, Grades K-5 Teachers, Support Staff 9/ 18 10/18 11/18 Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Specialist, 4/19 STEAM Specialist, The principal will participate in the Collaborative School Communities Program, "Just Say Hi" and the "No Place For Hate" initiative to continue to build a strong inclusive school culture where all students have equal access to a high quality education and create a strong inclusive culture for all students, staff, and families. Parents of students in grades K-5, Grades K-5 Teachers, Support Staff 6/19 10/18 11/18 5/19 6/19 Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Specialist, STEAM Specialist, Guidance Counselor TRIBES Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September of school year 2018-2019, TAOTS will continue to engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement by offering monthly parent workshops hosted by the classroom teachers, specialty teachers, service providers, guidance counselor, TRIBES leaders, and the Curriculum and STEAM specialists. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources-Principal, Academic Coaches and Data Specialist Instructional Resources- Professional Development Services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the principal will participate in instructional planning and Principal's professional learning communities to continue to support the teachers and staff as measured by a 1.5% increase in the number of students scoring at levels 3 and 4 on the Math and ELA benchmark assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress will be a February mid-year professional development support survey to measure the increase or decrease of the teacher/ staff level of support they receive as a result of goal related activities to determine if the leadership is on track to meet the desired goal. The 2018-2019 school survey will also be used to measure the effectiveness of meeting the desired goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Currently P.S. 682 offers many parent workshops, family events and opportunities for families, staff and the community to work together to ultimately assist all children to succeed. After a review of attendance forms the SLT observed that we have strength in that there are large turnouts for school hosted family events but there is a lower turnout for Parent Teacher Organization (PTO) meetings throughout the year. It has been noted that attendance has been low at PTO meetings. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 96% of parents/ guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event ( open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event or science fair); however, it is still noted that the turnout for specific events where parents have more of a voice is still low. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with an increase in parent communication, there will be a 3% increase in parental engagement during PTO meetings and sponsored events as measured by parental and staff attendance forms. 2018-19 CEP 31 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The PTO, Community Coordinator and the Parent Coordinator will collaborate to create Robocalls before all community events within our school. PTO members, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, PTO Members, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, PTO members, SLT Members, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, TRIBES Facilitator Grade Leaders, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, TRIBES Facilitator PTO members, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, Principal PTO members, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, All parents of K-5 students 9/18- 6/19 weekly, monthly 9/18- 6-19 Parent committees will be formed for various various high profile community events within our school. All parents of K-5 students Class parents will recruit parents to support events within our school as well as increase the level of parent turn-out at events. All parents of K-5 students 9/18-6/19 Monthly Teacher Grade Leaders will recruit teachers and staff for both school and off-site school/community events. All K-5 staff 9/17-6/18 Monthly PT0 meetings will be scheduled during morning school hours and evening hours to accommodate parents and increase parental engagement. All parents of K-5 students 9/17-6/18 Monthly Parent workshops will be scheduled before or after PTO meetings to increase the level of parent turn outs during PTO meetings. All parents of K-5 students 9/17-6/18 Monthly 2018-19 CEP 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources- STEAM Specialist, Curriculum Specialist, Data Specialist, Tribes facilitator, Media Literacy Consultant, Media Literacy Teacher Instructional Resources- Broadband, Internet, recording devices, supplies and materials for workshops Scheduled Adjustments- Planning time for workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant X SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in attendance in parent workshops, speakers and parental communication during PTO meetings, there will be a 1.5% increase in participation at PTO meetings as measured by parent and staff attendance forms. Beginning February 2019, the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the PTO president will meet monthly at PTO and PTO/ Admin meetings to report on the effectiveness of our parent outreach initiative and whether there is an increase or decrease in parental involvement in our effort to increase the parent attendance at school/ community events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used is the survey monkey as well as parent attendance forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) The median scale score between level 2 and level 3 in grades 4 and 5 ( 592 and 593) and level 1 assessments and report card benchmarks in grade 3 Mathematics The median scale score between level 2 and level 3 in grades 4 and 5 (593 and 595) and level 1 assessments and report card benchmarks in grade 3 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided reading Small group School day School day Smallstrategy groups Small Group School day I-ready Small group/one-to-one Orton Gillingham/ Small group/one-to-one Fundations School day School day Saturday Saturday Project SMARTS Re-teach group Small Group Small group School day Small group strategy group Small group School day Interventiongroup Supplemental Math Program (5th Grade) Smallgroup School day Small Group School day 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Level 1 assessments and report card benchmark Level 1 assessments and report card benchmark ChildStudyTeamReport Project Math (Grades 2-5) Re-teach group Small Group Small group Small group strategy group Small group After-School School day Small group School day Small group Small group School day 1:1 Re-teach group Small group strategy group At - risk counseling At- risk speech 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 39  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy of Talented Scholars, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Academy of Talented Scholars will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESEA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 682 The Academy of Talented Scholars, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and 2018-19 CEP 43  students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Academy of Talented Scholars Borough Brooklyn School Number 682 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Josephine Sportella-Giusto Coach Pam Mullin ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marcela Tomeo /ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Catalano/Common Branch Teacher/Subject Area Farrah Feygis/Teacher Related-Service Provider Liza Trinkle/Speech Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Sandro Grancaric Coach Stacy Butsikares School Counselor Karen Konstan Parent Leslie Tulumello Parent Coordinator Melissa Appelbaum Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etienne Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 363 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To guide instructional planning for our ELLs we use TCRWP Running Records, ENL and classroom teachers observations during the lessons, group, pair and individual work, teacher notes and checklists during guided reading and conferences, quizzes, completed graphic organizers, student writings produced with aid and well as independently (e.g., response to prompts, journal entries, jots, reading responses), rubrics, completed classwork and homework, as well as exit tickets in grades 3 through 5. Based on our data, ELL students with lower English Language Proficiency levels need more instructional support with decoding and phonemic awareness. ELL students with a higher language proficiency level have more literal comprehension and need instruction with inferential questions as well as figurative language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 49  Classroom teachers and ENL teachers meet to discuss their observations and the results of assessments. We use the data to group students in strategy groups, guided reading groups, to choose appropriate partnerships and to differentiate instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To identify baseline, progress and areas of need we use TCRWP on demand beginning and end of unit assessments, other publishers’ and teacher created beginning and end of the unit assessments, rubrics, projects, written reports, practical exams, NYC ELA and Math Performance Tasks for K through 2nd grade and NYC ELA and Math CCLS-Aligned Baseline and Benchmarks for 3rd through 5th grades. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our classroom teachers, ENL teachers, coaches and data specialist meet to discuss the results of the assessments. The data team analyses the results of each individual student, looking at both their overall performance as well as how they did in each standard. The data is transferred to spreadsheets and graphics are created so that the whole school can access it via Google Docs. We use the data to adjust instruction in upcoming units so as to target the standards that our students need help mastering and to further differentiate instruction keeping each student’s need in mind. In our 3rd, 4th and 5th grades, the results are also used to sort students into test prep groups for the NYS ELA and Math. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Formative assessments are used by the classroom teachers and the ENL teachers to collect data. Teachers look at the results together to see how ELLs are performing on assessments and if progress is being made. This helps teachers to look closely at their Tier 1, or their core instruction, to assess what is working and what needs tweaking, and to help teachers further differentiate their instruction focusing on each ELL’s language and literacy development needs. Measures are taken to provide instruction that is more rigorous and targeted to student needs. Such measures include taking into consideration individual children's cultural and linguistic background, building on their background knowledge, providing opportunities to work in pairs and groups, utilizing routine checks of comprehension, forming guided reading groups and strategy groups, assigning appropriate homework that matches their current proficiency level and the explicit teaching of key terms, words, idioms and phrases that ELLs need to be exposed to. After looking closely at data over a period and recognizing that a child is still not progressing as expected, next steps are taken according to the RTI model. Our coaches meet with the student and use screeners to further assess their literacy skills. The classroom teachers, ENL teachers, guidance counselor, and academic coaches meet and discuss the student as a whole taking into consideration information from a number of levels including their academic, social-emotional and home-community characteristics. Achievable goals are set for a period according to each ELL’s needs. Intensive small group interventions are put into place by the classroom and ENL teachers as a Tier 2 support. The team meets periodically to discuss progress or whether goals should be revised. Additionally, classroom, ENL and special education teachers meet during their administrative preps to analyze ELA state exam data question by question and pinpoint which standards need to be retaught to the whole class and which need to be retaught to specific target groups only. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the outcomes from the NYSESLAT, the NYS ELA and Math to evaluate our ELL programs. We use the RLAT report and the ELL Data Analysis Tool to gather the data and inform and adjust our programs accordingly. Below is the data we gathered from the 2016 NYSESLAT results. · 1st Grade: Based on 2016 NYSESLAT results we observed that 54.5% of our 2015-2016 kindergarten ELLs (now in first grade) became proficient having reached Commanding level. Also, 91% of our kindergarten ELLs advanced one or more proficiency levels on the 2016 NYSESLAT from their 2015 NYSITELL scores. Only one of our 2015-2016 kindergarteners remained at the same proficiency level (Expanding). · 2nd Grade: Looking at our 2015-2016 first grade ELLs' (now in second grade) NYSESLAT scores, we noticed that 50% reached Commanding level and the other 50% remained at the same proficiency level (Expanding). · 3rd Grade: Twenty two percent of our 2015-2016 second grade ELLs (now in third grade) became proficient and are now 2018-19 CEP 50  former ELLs. Also, 78% advanced one or more proficiency levels on the 2016 NYSESLAT. Twenty two percent remained at the same proficiency level (Expanding). · 4th Grade: We only had one former ELL in our ENL program this year who became Commanding in 2015. · 5th Grade: Fifty percent of our 2015-2016 fourth grade ELLs (now in fifth grade) advanced a proficiency level to reach Commanding level, thus becoming proficient or former ELLs and the other 50% remained at the same proficiency level (Expanding). Current 2017 Data -1st Grade: Based on 2017 NYSESLAT results, one of the ELL students progressed 4 levels from entering(2016 NYSITELL) to expanding. The other ELL student went from expanding(2016 NYSITELL) to transitioning based on the 2017 NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher is working closely with the child's teachers and IEP team to support the child's academic growth. -2nd Grade: Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT results, two ELL students reached commanding level. Two ELL students remained the same proficiency level. One ELL student moved from transitioning to expanding. One ELL student went from transitioning to emerging. As a team, we are closely monitoring this student and is working closely with the child's teachers and IEP team to support the student's academic needs. -3rd Grade: Based on 2017 NYSESLAT results, one out of the four ELL students reached commanding level. One new comer ELL remained at entering level and the other two are hold over ELLs. Out of the two ELLs, one moved up in proficiency level and the other ELL went down a proficiency level. As a school team, we are closely monitoring each individual to support their academic needs. 4th Grade: Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT results, four out of the five ELL students remained at the same proficiency level. One ELL went down a proficiency level. Based on this data, the school team is working closely with the teachers to monitor and assess each individual student to support and meet their needs as well as provide academic intervention. 5th Grade: No ELL students 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teachers analyze the RLAT report and the ELL Data Analysis Tool and create a spreadsheet with the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results of all ELLs and former ELLs in our school in the past 5 years. The ENL teachers distribute copies of the spreadsheet to the administration, data specialist, coaches and all teachers and service providers who have ELLs and former ELLs in their classes or groups in the beginning of each school year. Furthermore, the spreadsheet is posted on Google Drive so that the entire school staff has access to it. The ENL teachers meet with all other teachers of ELLs to discuss the progress each student made. The data specialist analyzes the NYS ELA and Math results, and creates spreadsheets and graphics to distribute to the administration, coaches, 3-5 grade teachers, service providers and specialty teachers. The spreadsheets and graphics are posted on Google Drive so that the entire staff has access to them as well. The results of the NYS ELA and Math are discussed in a staff meeting at the beginning of each school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are serviced by our two ENL teachers through the push-in model. Our ENL teachers work with ELLs in collaboration with the general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is common preparation time between the two teachers and virtual collaborative lesson planning and unit 2018-19 CEP 51  planning through Google Drive and Rubicon Atlas. Our ENL teachers work with small groups of ELLs and former ELLs, or one on one (depending on the number of ELLs in each class and the number of minutes of service mandated per ELL). ENL teachers provide scaffolding during and after mini-lessons (eliciting the teaching point and often re-teaching it), adapt and/or create materials for ELLs at varying proficiency levels and use a myriad of ENL strategies to support language learning. Our ENL program provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in our ENL program come from many different language backgrounds, and English is sometimes the only common language among the students. Our ELLs with the same home language background work in a buddy system in order to assist each other during lessons, thus allowing students to access content by interacting with each other at varying levels of English language proficiency. Teachers organize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the home language among peers with the same home language. Tasks are centered around the development of academic English. Our ENL and classroom teachers also provide home language resources in the form of bilingual libraries, bilingual individual word walls, bilingual labels placed around the classroom, bilingual texts, technology and primary resource materials to help ELLs access content and to accelerate English language learning. In our ENL program we provide both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL instruction. ENL strategies are used for English language development during both stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction. · Stand-alone ENL instruction is provided by our ENL teachers in order to develop English language skills so that ELLs can succeed in core content subjects. Our Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction per week. · Integrated ENL instruction is provided by our ENL teachers and classroom teachers through the co-teaching model in order to build English language skills through content area instruction. All our current ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week, while our former ELLs who have achieved Commanding (or proficient) level on the NYSESLAT in the last 2 years receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. Our classes are heterogeneous, which means that ENL teachers work with groups of varying proficiency levels in each grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? PS 682 ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency level by scheduling the appropriate number of minutes in the ENL teachers' mandated programs. The ENL teachers set up their schedules so as to service ELLs mostly during their Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop lessons, Literacy lessons, Shared Reading and Read Aloud lessons. In accordance with CR Part 154.2, our students who are: * Entering proficiency level ELLs receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) consisting of 1 unit of study of stand-alone ENL (180 minutes) and 1 unit of study of integrated ENL in ELA (180 minutes). * Emerging proficiency level ELLs receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) consisting of 0.5 unit of stand-alone ENL (90 minutes), 1 unit of study of integrated ENL in ELA (180 minutes) and 0.5 unit of study of either stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL in a core content area (90 minutes). * Transitioning proficiency level ELLs receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) consisting of 0.5 unit of integrated EN in ELA (90 minutes), and 0.5 unit of study that can be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL in a core content area (90 minutes). * Expanding proficiency level ELLs receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) consisting of 1 unit of integrated ENL in ELA (180 minutes), or other core content area. * Commanding proficiency level students (former ELLs) continue to receive service for an additional two years after achieving English proficiency in the NYSESLAT. They receive 0.5 unit of study per week (90 minutes) consisting of 0.5 unit of integrated ENL in ELA or other core content area or other approved former ELL services. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As previously mentioned, our ENL teachers service ELLs mostly during their Teacher's College Reading and Writing lessons, Literacy and Shared Reading lessons using the push-in and co-teaching model. However, they also push-in a few periods a week for other content areas. Content area instruction is delivered by both the classroom teachers and the ENL teachers with an emphasis on differentiated instruction for ELLs through the use of scaffolding techniques, visual aids, realia, intensive and deliberate modeling, Total Physical Reponse and multi-sensory activities, graphic organizers, sentence starters, peer interactions and vocabulary instruction of content area words, as well as the basic vocabulary unknown to students in these specific content areas. Special attention is given to the teaching of Academic Language, as the students are greatly exposed to it, even more now that the Common Core Standards increasingly focuses on reading comprehension of nonfiction and informational texts. ENL teachers provide instruction in the content areas of Math, Science and Social Studies by making the subjects more comprehensible through differentiation and re-teaching of teaching points. Native language support is provided by a teacher, assistant teacher or buddy system when possible to help reiterate the teaching point and allow ELLs to access the content. Bilingual materials are also used for native language support. Content teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to incorporate a balanced literacy instruction through the use of shared reading, read-alouds, interactive writing, and choral reading in the teaching of Social Studies as well. Along with the differentiation strategies listed above, the ENL teacher also makes use of poetry, songs, drama, vocabulary games, a library stocked with nonfiction literature of the content area at their reading levels, computer games, videos and resources such as BrainPop, Starfall, PBS Kids, Reading A-Z, Teaching Channel, Hubbard’s Cupboard and other various websites to support the literacy component of instruction. The explicit ELA instruction for ELLs in their classrooms and in the push-in ENL program includes the Teacher's College workshop model for Reading and Writing with a focus on shared reading and writing. Consistent with the Natural Approach for second language acquisition, our ELLs are fully incorporated into their regular classroom along with English proficient students to enable them to benefit from social interaction and academic curriculum in the target language. PS 682 uses a project based approach that maximizes student interaction and collaboration, targeting oral language development (listening and speaking skills), which is crucial for ELLs’ language developmental. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs whose home language is Spanish, who take the NYSITELL and test eligible for ENL services, are also given the Spanish Lab within the first 10 days of enrollment. Throughout the school year our in house bilingual pedagogues assist classroom and ENL teachers by translating/interpreting assessments to ELLs, helping assess their strengths and weaknesses and plan next steps for each child. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. There are no SIFE students in our school at this time. Should our school enroll a SIFE student in the future, their particular needs will be assessed and more intensive and one on one academic intervention will be given by all necessary support staff. First the guidance counselor will meet with the student and assist them to understand the importance of the school routines and rules. They will also be given a student buddy who speaks their native language to help them transition into the school setting and to be a social and academic support for them. Instruction for these students will be greatly differentiated and a teacher assistant will be assigned to them for literacy intervention and support. The ENL teacher will focus on the more basic oral and academic vocabulary they will need to make content area instruction more comprehensible. We will also use an online Literacy intervention program called iReady which provides tailored instruction and practice for the student's needs based on ongoing assessment. The student will be placed in the best class that can serve their needs at the time. b. For the newcomers who have received ELL services for less than three years, native language support is provided by teachers, teacher assistants and other support staff who speak their language on an as-needed basis. Bilingual materials are 2018-19 CEP 53  also available. As they advance on their proficiency levels, students are given ENL instruction by the ENL teacher in the content areas of math, science and social studies in order to assist them with comprehension of these subject areas. Students are paired with native speakers on a regular basis for opportunities to hear conversational English spoken through partner activities such as book discussions, math problem solving explanations, science experiments and literacy center discussions. Teachers provide picture supports and the use of technology in their lessons in order to ensure better understanding by these newcomers. c. For developing ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years of ELL services we provide small group targeted instruction that utilizes the data gathered from their NYSESLAT results, NYS ELA and Math results, unit exams and teacher reading and writing conference notes. The classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and academic coaches meet to discuss the best academic plan of action for these students. The ENL teachers gives these individual students differentiated instructional support based on their performance on the NYSESLAT modalities. Speaking, listening, reading and writing activities are adapted or designed according to each individual student’s needs. These students also receive additional NYS ELA and Math test preparation through the use of a Teacher Created Materials publication, "Targeted Reading Intervention" in a small group with an ENL teacher. Parents are also invited in to discuss any important developments and are offered recommendations for the family to follow with the student. d. We do not have long term ELLs in our school at this time. Should we have such a population, we will support them with more individualized instruction through the use of one on one academic intervention instruction by a certified teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The student's learning style will be taken into account to plan instruction and technology supports will be interwoven throughout their instruction. Their interests will be a tool for finding the content to drive instruction so their best work can be achieved. e. Our ELLs who have achieved English proficiency (Commanding) in the NYSESLAT receive ELL services for an additional two years consisting of 0.5 units of study (90 minutes) per week of integrated ENL in ELA/core content areas. Current and former ELLs in 3rd, 4th and 5th grades also receive additional ELA and Math instruction in preparation for the New York Stare ELA and Math exams for 2 hours on Thursday afternoons from October to May. The program is taught by certified classroom and ENL teachers. Classroom teachers of these current and former ELLs are offered workshops that aid the classroom teacher in implementing strategies to support ELLs. The ENL teachers also speak to the classroom teachers throughout the year regarding any additional supports that individual students may need. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers of ELLs-SWDs follow the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Units, the New York City Scope and Sequence for Social Studies and Science and Math in Focus curriculum. Teachers make the academic content more comprehensible through differentiations such as the use of graphics and visual cues, graphic organizers, interactive discovery center work, Smart Board presentations, partner work, different paper choices and small groups assisted by the paraprofessionals designated to their classes. Goals are adapted to the learner and those who take standardized tests will focus more on increasing general and academic vocabulary, as well as reading skills and reading comprehension. For Entering and Emerging ELLs who are also SWDs, we also provide bilingual dictionaries, bilingual personal word walls, directions translated, pictures of the steps (visual cues) and native language support through a buddy system with either a bilingual pedagogue, assistant teacher or classmate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, all students are taught with the standards based curriculum appropriate for their grade. All teachers meet weekly for common grade planning to provide uniform grade appropriate curriculum and content for all students including our ELL-SWDs. All students are exposed to a very rich multidisciplinary arts focused curriculum. Our school has a Schoolwide Enrichment Model and we have weekly Enrichment Clusters where all students select a cluster of interest and all students are integrated on the grade level. ELL-SWDs' IEPs are analyzed by our guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, family worker, classroom teaches, ENL teachers and service providers to determine appropriate classroom placement in the least restrictive environment. Also, the IEPs are studied and discussed so that goals are set and the appropriate modifications are made to units of study and lesson plans. 2018-19 CEP 54  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school uses data from running records, the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, the NYS ELA and Math exams, benchmark and ongoing classroom assessments in order to determine which ELLs and former ELLs need intervention and additional supports. In order to support our below benchmark ELLs and former ELLs in ELA we use guided reading, strategy groups, RAZ Kids in grades K-3 and iReady in grades K-5. iReady is a very streamlined instructional online reading intervention program used during Reading Workshop and at home for extra support. This program engages students in ongoing assessment to provide individualized work and further assessments. ENL teachers also create supports to assist with interventions needed for ELLs when pushing into a class. Our school offers an October through May language enrichment and test prep program for our ELLs and former ELLs. Test sophistication materials and teacher prepared materials are used to support the transitioning and expanding ELLs in preparation for the NYSESLAT as targeted intervention. The Wilson Fundations program in conjunction with Orton-Gillingham techniques and materials are used as another support for ELA instruction with Entering and Emerging ELLs. For science, social studies and math, pictures, realia, charts and picture books are utilized to provide intervention for ELLs in all grades. In addition, RTI plans are put into place based on ENL and classroom teachers’ recommendations taking into account the number of years of instruction in an ELL program, level of English proficiency and home language literacy, results of the NYSESLAT, parent/guardian request, samples of student work in English and their home language if possible, English and home language literacy needs of long term ELLs, bilingual educational evaluation for SWDs, and content area and social emotional needs of SIFE students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school data shows that 14.56% of ELLs out of 363 students are reading below benchmark. Based on this current data along with student's English Language Proficiency levels and grade band, the push in and pull out program will be better adjusted to suite the needs of the ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are included in all enrichment activities such as TADA, Town Hall Dance Program, Dancing Classrooms and Enrichment Clusters. ELLs are also offered the opportunity to enroll in the afterschool programs Wingspan and Italian Federation, both of which are arts themed programs that are housed in our school. In addition, ELLs are invited to participate in our Project Smarts after-school program that is offered between October and May, where students receive supports in reading, writing and math. ELLs' parents/guardians receive invitations to attend the programs celebrations in the parents'/guardians' preferred language. ELLs' parents/guardians are encouraged to be involved, to attend and to volunteer in class and schoolwide celebrations and performances, and interpreters are available at those events. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support our ELLs instructionally all classroom teachers have access to Smart Boards in the presentation of their lessons and have the ability to offer an interactive approach that is more visual and hands on in teaching all of the subject areas. ELLs are supported with the Wilson Fundations Literacy program, leveled library and guided reading books, books on tape, Smart Board instruction, Book Flicks online (online program that reads books to students and enables them to practice listening and comprehension), Reading A-Z online, visual cues supporting all charts, shared reading and choral reading. The ENL teachers also provide picture prompt support for reading and writing, native language materials such as bilingual picture dictionaries and content-based bilingual glossaries in various languages and the school library offers Native language literature and reference books in various languages as well. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 55  In our English as a New Language program, home language support is delivered through the use of bilingual signs throughout the classroom, bilingual dictionaries, a buddy system where Entering and Emerging ELLs are paired with a bilingual pedagogue, assistant teacher or a classmate who speaks their home language, the use of technology (i.e., iPads to listen to books being read in their home language and for interpretation and translation when necessary). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. We provide leveled reading books for students based on their reading ability, and we also take students’ interest into account when choosing mentor texts and assigning books and texts, on grade level texts in all content areas are scaffolded with supports by the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. In addition, we provide lessons and materials aligned to grade and age, and appropriate common core standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares a building with two other schools. We share several rooms, including the library, the auditorium, the lunch room, the school yard and the art room. To support ELLs’ biliteracy, we make sure that our library is stocked with books in the ELLs’ home languages. The ENL team in each of the schools reaches out to each other for resources and strategies. Students from one of the schools in our building join our students for Enrichment Clusters, making connections and new relationships within our community. During Spirit Week, the Student Councils from all three schools get together to decide on activities that students throughout the building will participate in. Those activities build community and create opportunities for interactions in English and in the ELLs’ home language, and for the use of rich authentic language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are supported before the beginning of the school year by having the parents'/guardians' questions answered by a school interpreter. The ENL teacher meets with the parents upon registration to assist them to complete the Home Language Survey, to interview the student and the parent, and to see if there are any concerns or needs to be addressed. The incoming kindergarten students are invited by the school's parent coordinator to a Kindergarten Orientation held in June for the upcoming school year. The Kindergarten Orientation is held by the administration, parent coordinator, school guidance counselor and academic coaches. The students are given a welcome summer packet to prepare them for the upcoming school year which includes a list of suggested book titles, recommended enrichment activities offered throughout the city and a supply request list for the new school year. All newly enrolled ELLs are supported by the ELL coordinator by providing reading lists, games and online activities and resources to parents to do at home at the time of enrollment. The ELL coordinator is available for questions and ongoing communication with parents/guardians of newly enrolled ELLs via email, phone or face-to-face meetings during weekly parent communication time on Tuesday afternoons. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We don’t offer language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 56  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs attend professional development throughout the year provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, The Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support, the Brooklyn South Field Support Center, and Teacher's College Columbia workshops on ELL strategies. On Mondays we use our professional development time for topics on all content areas incorporating language acquisition research and ELL strategies. Our professional development sessions include all staff (pedagogues, assistant teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff, service providers, coaches, principal and assistant principal). Also, our school secretaries attend yearly professional development about the ELL enrollment process and record keeping. Our ENL teacher will attend professional development with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project to adapt the units of study for English Language Learners Institute for Grades K-5 to support ELLs with NYS Learning Standards. All teachers of ELLs are getting in house professional development with Teacher's College staff developer to support them with ELL strategies within the reading and writing units of study for K-5. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school will meet the requirement of a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers by having our professional development include a focus on language acquisition with a concentration on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For our ENL teachers a minimum of 50% of the required professional development will cover language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. This professional development will be given in-house by our ELL coordinator and academic coach as well as going out to Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support, the Brooklyn South Field Support Center, and Teacher's College Columbia professional development workshops on ELL strategies. All professional developments will be recorded through attendance sheets and agendas that are kept on file in the school's main office. Some of the topics being discussed this year are RTI for ELLs, Teaching Diverse Learners, Formative Assessment, Strengthening Comprehension Skills, Phonics and Strategies for Successful Co-teaching. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school offers monthly parent workshops for ELL parents to discuss the goals of the ELL program and their child’s performance and goals in particular, to provide parents with information about understanding the language proficiency assessment results and the language development needs in the content areas. ENL teachers and classroom teachers are also available to parents during the parent involvement time on Monday afternoons to meet with parents to discuss individual needs of ELLs. At the weekly Monday meetings, teachers will meet with individual parents as needed to discuss goals of the program and needs of ELLs in all content areas. All materials are provided in the parents'/guardians' preferred language. We use our bilingual staff members to translate parental letters, or we send the letters to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. Oral interpretation is also available in the parents'/guardians' preferred language through the use of bilingual staff or the when necessary through Language Line Solutions over-the-phone interpreters. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in our school is growing as we continually seek out ways for parents to play a more active role in the school. At the beginning of the year the parents are invited to a Curriculum Night where they are able to meet with classroom teachers, specialty teachers, service providers and support staff to learn about the curriculum and the expectations for their children and for themselves as parents. There are two Parent-Teacher Conferences (in the fall and in the spring) and one Spring Ahead Parent Teacher conference scheduled where parents get 1:1 meetings with their child’s teachers to discuss their child’s progress. We will continue to offer monthly teacher-led workshops for parents of ELLs on each grade to share the current work being done with their children, discuss their progress and various ways to support the children at home and enrich their learning. These workshops are designated parent involvement time on Tuesday afternoon of each week. ENL Teachers are also available to meet or talk on the phone with parents every Tuesday afternoon during the parent engagement period. Moreover, all parents are invited to participate in school wide activities such as Publishing Parties, Movie Night, Enrichment Cluster Showcases at the end of each of our three Enrichment cycles, Winter and Spring Music/Dance concerts, PTO led free events and fundraisers, school spirit events and special parties (e.g., Halloween, end of the year party). All letters sent home with information detailing these events are translated into the parents' preferred languages. All parents are also offered the opportunity to act as class parents of their child's class to organize the parents and be a liaison for their needs and contributions to the classroom. Interpreters are always available at these functions so that ELL parents are included and able to have a voice within the events themselves. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: N/A 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Josephin Sportella-Giusto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Academy of Talented Schola School DBN: 20K682 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Josephine Sportella-Giusto Principal Sandro Grancaric Assistant Principal Melissa Appelbaum Parent Coordinator Anna Chen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leslie Tulumello Parent Neil Rathan Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Garcia Teacher/Subject Area Stacy Butsikares Pamela Mullin Coach Coach Karen Konstan School Counselor Karina Costantino Christine Etienne Liza Trinkle Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL CPS Other Other Speech Provider Other 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K682 School Name: The Academy of Talented Scholars Superintendent: K.Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marcela Aires Goncalves-Tomeo ENL teacher, ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is the first piece of data considered when assessing our translation needs. Special attention is given to Part III of the document, the Parent Information section of the HLIS. Part III specifically asks “In what language would you like to receive written information from the school?” and “In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?” The responses to these two questions are our primary basis for assessing the need for written translation and oral interpretation. The classroom teachers also survey the parents at the beginning of the school year to ensure that their students' families receive correspondence in their preferred languages. We then keep record of the totals of each written language required for each individual class in the main office and in the copy room. This enables the school staff to send home school notices and important information in the parents' preferred languages. Also, for the oral interpretation needs of our parents, we utilize the Student Emergency Contact Card (Blue Card), which is updated in the beginning of the school year. We use the preferred language listed on the Blue Card when contacting a parent by phone or in a face to face meeting. In addition, we utilize ATS reports such as RPOB and RAPL, which 2018-19 CEP 61  include the GEO code and home language code, as well as the Blue Card biographical data, parent surveys and teacher surveys. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese/Any Georgian English Mandarin Polish Russian Spanish Urdu Uzbek NA 0 2 15 4 258 0 2 8 5 1 3 NA 0% 0.67% 5.03% 1.34% 86.58% 0% 0.67% 2.68% 1.68% 0.34% 1.01% NA 1 4 14 6 248 1 2 10 6 2 4 NA 0.34% 1.34% 4.7% 2.01% 83.22% 0.34% 0.67% 3.36% 2.01% 0.67% 1.34% NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The only language that represents at least a 10% population of our school is English. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent handbooks September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school translates all parent communications sent out in the written language requested by the parents. We use our bilingual staff members to translate documents or, when the language required is not 2018-19 CEP 62  spoken by any staff member, we request translation from the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit at least 10 days before the documents needs to be send home. The translations go out at the same time in all languages needed (including the English version). Newsletters Schoolwide calendars Class calendars Parent-teacher conference announcements Monthly Monthly Monthly Same Same Same September, November, March and May Same After-school program information October Same Gifted and Talented testing registration information and test dates Test prep after-school program information December/January October, November and January Same New York State testing dates and information September, February, March, April and May General overview of student curriculum Invitations to school events Invitations to meetings Invitations to parent teacher-led workshops Letters from school leadership Safety letters September Year-round Year-round Year-round Year-round Year-round Same Same Same Same Same Same Same Same 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Orientation Year-round (within the first 10 days of enrollment of an ELL) interpretation service(s)? Our school interprets all parent meetings in the parents' preferred languages. We use our bilingual staff members to interpret the interactions or, when the language required is not spoken by any staff member, we call the DOE vendor Language Line Solutions for over-the-phone interpretations. Also, we may hire live interpreters for parents who RSVP to 2018-19 CEP 63  an event if no staff member speaks the parents' preferred language. At times, parents whose language isn't spoken by any of our staff have choose to bring a friend to interpret a meeting. Our school allows this type of interpretation if the parents choose to do so. Curriculum Night PTC Fall PTC Spring PTC Spring Ahead PTC Teacher-Led Parent Workshops (all classroom and specialty teachers, and service providers) September November March May Monthly Parent Communication Times Weekly Same Same Same Same Same Same Academic and/or behavior intervention meetings Year-round (on an as-needed basis) Same IEP Meetings Year-round Incoming Kindergarten Orientation June Same Same 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school uses Blackboard Connect, an automated service that places phone calls to parents in their preferred languages in case of emergencies. Also, our entire staff is prepared to call Language Line Solutions interpreters to reach parents whose preferred language is not spoken by any of our staff members. The staff has been trained to access over-the-phone interpreters and every staff member was given a sheet with instructions on how to access the service. The sheet is to be kept at an easy to access place in each classroom and office in our school building. Blue cards with updated parents' phone numbers and email addresses are kept in binders in the main office as well as in the Cumulative Records (CUM) in the child's classroom. We use that information to reach parents, and if necessary, other emergency contacts listed. Furthermore, our school website is powered by Google Translate and the information it contains can be automatically translated to parents' preferred languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the first staff meeting of the year (Chancellor's Conference Day in September), the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) and the Parent Coordinator (PC) will inform the staff about the parents' right to interpretation in 2018-19 CEP 64  their preferred language. The LAC and the PC will train the entire staff on how to access the over-the-phone interpretation services via Language Line Solutions. All staff members will receive a hard copy with instructions on how to reach Language Line Solutions over-the-phone interpreters and how to effectively communicate with parents via interpreters. Also, staff will be given copies of the Parent's Guide to Language Access brochure to be distributed to parents whose preferred language is covered (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). Those brochures will also be prominently displayed on the main office counter and will be distributed by the ENL teachers during the ELL Parent Orientation. Furthermore, staff will be informed of parents' right to receive written notices in their preferred language. All classroom teachers will conduct a language survey in September so that the copy room staff is aware of how many copies of documents in languages other than English are needed per classroom, and what those languages are. We will use centrally translated documents posted on the Intranet in the nine languages covered by the New York City Department of Education. Most other documents will be translated by our in-house bilingual staff. However, for those languages not spoken by any staff member, we will request translation through the Translation and Interpretation Unit at least 10 days before distribution. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will complete and submit Translation Request Forms along with the document to be translated as far in advance as possible, but at least 10 days prior to the date of distribution. The full text of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 is on file in the main office (room 214). This text is available to anyone requesting to view this regulation. There is a bulletin board designated for parents to receive pertinent information. This bulletin board is visible upon entry in the main office. The Parent's Guide to Language Access poster is prominently displayed on the bulletin board, indicating to parents the availability of interpretation services. Also, parents whose preferred language is covered by the NYCDOE receive a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their preferred language. Among other items, the document describes parents' rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Moreover, parents of ELLs are informed of their right to translation and interpretation services during the ELL Parent Orientation and all parents whose preferred language is other than English are also informed of those rights during our Curriculum Night in September. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 682K will make every effort to consistently seek feedback from parents to ensure that they have access to the school community and that they are being supported, so they in turn may be active in the school community. We will use a survey as an end of the year assessment to hear from parents regarding their experiences and get feedback regarding the quality and availability of the services. We will schedule a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices. 2018-19 CEP 65 
