2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K683 School Name: THE SCHOOL FOR CLASSICS: AN ACADEMY OF THINKERS, WRITERS AND PERFORMERS Principal: NICOLE TANCREDI 2018-19 CEP 1  2018-19 CEP 2  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 3  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School for Classics 331900011683 9-12 School Number (DBN): 19K683 370 Fountain Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11208 718-277-1069 Phone Number: 718-277-1873 Fax: Nicole Tancredi Ntancredi@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Nicole Tancredi Donna Limoli TameekaSingleton Nicole Tancredi TameekaSingleton Samantha Negron JaiquanPrescott not applicable District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Brooklyn, NY 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 516-732-6156 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 4  Brooklyn North FSC Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718- 923- 5145 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nicole Tancredi Donna Limoli TameekaSingleton Ivory Ellison Samantha Negron, 12th grade JaiquanPrescott, 12th grade not applicable Kathryn Mitchell Lisette Peralta Margarita Torres *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT/ Secretary Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Name Alvertina Morales LazetteMoore Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent UFT/Teacher UFT/Guidance Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 7  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 8  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 9  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? As a nurturing community dedicated to fostering confidence, empathy, and academic achievement for each individual student, we make education accessible, stimulating, and meaningful to a broad range of learners. All of our students will graduate within four years, college and career proficient with the essential knowledge and skills to become active participating members of society. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our educational premise is that all children must receive grade level instruction that is challenging, yet engaging, rigorous yet motivational. Whether it is by providing students with scaffolds and supports or by providing students with enrichment opportunities, our teachers work hard to create a variety of instructional activities for students to achieve their learning goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School for Classics High School serves a population of approximately 300 students in grades 9 through 12. We have a diverse student body. The adults in our school community are committed to work together to accelerate student achievement and to create a caring and nurturing second home for our learners. We are part of New York City's AP for ALL and College Access for ALL Programs. We share the belief that all students should have access to college-level courses. We offer Biology Advanced Placement, AP Language and Composition, AP Environmental Science, AP Statistics, AP Government and AP Psychology. These courses are available to students committed to push themselves academically, in particular, those students who choose to follow an intensive academic schedule in lieu of performing art classes. College classes are available through our partnership with Medgar Evers College. SFC also partners with CUNY's Creative Arts Team. Teaching artists collaborate with our own teachers to ensure that our students have a vibrant and relevant drama experience. Several times during the year, our young actors attend professional performances at Queens Theatre. Many of our elective courses revolve around theatre. Students who elect to be at our school begin their high school career with introductory theatre classes. Plays are staged by students guided by their teachers and take place twice a year. Senior English curriculum incorporates performance arts elements culminating in a senior production. As the development of higher order thinking skills is one of the most important attributes we can impart to our students, the school works hard in cultivating teachers’ abilities to develop student writing. Developing the craft of writing is interwoven with the development of our students’ ability to think critically. To this end, a large part of the work of teacher teams is dedicated to the analysis of students’ writing and the identification of strategies to address areas of need. To further enhance our collaborative practices and to enhance teachers’ professional practice, our faculty participates in studies of professional literature designed to move the school’s writing agenda forward. After school, we provide our students with opportunities to participate in clubs, academic support and enrichment opportunities. We offer a variety of extra-curricular activities in order to foster a positive self-esteem, appropriate social interactions and team spirit, and to cultivate their talents and skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In recent years, we saw an increase in the percentage of English Language Learners from approximately 13% to 22%. Of our ELLs, 7% are categorized as SIFE (students with interrupted formal education) and 11% are categorized as long term ELLs. Our rainbow of languages include Spanish, Bengali, Arabic and French. Close to 60% of our ELLs made language gains as reflected in the 2016 NYSESLAT results. Our students with special needs comprise 22% of our population. To address their needs, we offer self contained classes in core academic areas as well as integrated co-teaching classes. Our two guidance counselors, school psychologist, IEP teacher, administrative staff and faculty are hyper- focused in ensuring that the academic and emotional needs of our students are met to the best of our ability. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  School for Classics High School reaps the benefits of the hard work, commitment and dedication of our school community. The survey results of 2017-18 showed significant gains in all Framework Elements. Survey Elements 2016-17 2017-18 Comparison Results Rigorous Instruction Collaborative Teachers Supportive Environment 3.40 4.32 2.51 Effective School Leadership 3.77 Strong Community Ties Trust 3.28 3.62 3.60 4.56 3.71 4.18 3.76 4.14 +.9 Above City +.87 Above City +.5 Above City +.63 Above City +.35 Above City +.64 Above City Despite the overall growth, data results clearly indicate that we need to focus on (1) attendance - supportive environment; (2) quality of student discussion - rigorous instruction and (3) mathematics instruction - rigorous instruction. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K683 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 287 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 51 4 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 84.7% % Reduced Lunch 22.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 33.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.66 4% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 52% 63.5% 4.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 33 19 7 81.9% 2.4% 21.6% 48.4% 11.8% 2.1% 4 22% 6.4 N/A N/A 78% 67% 88.6% 6% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 Rigorous Instruction section of the Framework results, our school's score went from 3.4 to 3.6; outperforming the borough average (+.11) and the city (+.09). In fact, all but one of the components within the Rigorous Instruction section significantly improved from the previous year's results: Academic Press from 2.75 to 3.67; Common Core Shifts in Literacy from 4.64 to 4.80; Quality of Student Instruction from 1.69 to 3.71. Over the past 3 years, we have seen a a trend downward in both Algebra and ELA common regent scores from 63.6 in 2015-16 school year to 61.5 and in ELA from 66.7 to 64.2. This year, our goal is to strengthen teachers' pedagogy in the teaching of mathematics and ELA by developing teachers capacity around inquiry practices, using assessment data to enhance student centered learning with multiple access entry points. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the academic year 2018-19, we will improve rigorous instruction in ELA and Math as demonstrated by growth on ELA and Math Regent scores by meeting or exceeding citywide average regents scores from 64.2 to 68 in ELA and from 61.5 to 66.33 in Math. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The assistant principal and lead teacher of mathematics and ELA in collaboration with math and ELA teachers will periodically and systematically analyze the results of summative, baseline and benchmark assessments in order to make informed decisions regarding curricular modifications and daily lessons. Part of this process is also to ensure that students have access to the most important concepts during the course sequence. Lesson plans will be studied during teacher meetings to determine alignment to the respective curricula and coherency between the aim and the activities planned. Inter-visitations will be conducted with a narrow lens on the effectiveness of planning as evidenced in the lesson itself. Lesson plans will be developed collaboratively to ensure uniformity of lessons and curricular fidelity as well as student intellectual engagement. Strategies from AP Statistics and AP Language curriculum will be selected and modified for use in Algebra and ELA (Common Core) lessons. Assistant principal will collaboratively work with the math and ELA department to develop lessons that include strategic scaffolding to ensure reinforcement of previous concepts. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math Dept. Aug 18- March 19 ELA Dept. AP, Lead teacher Math and ELA Teachers Math Dept. ELA Dept. September 2018 to May, 2019 AP Supervision, Principal, Math and ELA Teachers Math Dept. ELA Dept. September 2018 to May 2019 AP Supervision, Math and ELA Department. Planned unit packets will be developed ahead of time with carefully chosen, regents-style questions and multi-tiered tasks that reinforce specific content and give students the opportunity to self-assess tasks. Math Dept. ELA Dept. September to May 2019 AP Supervision School leaders will conduct instructional rounds to focus on student centered instructional activities and on the multiple entry access points. Findings will be the basis for discussions, teacher feedback and professional development. Math Dept. ELA Dept. September to April, 2019. Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 15  Curriculum and Meet the Teacher Night in September of 2018. Families will receive syllabus with course deadlines for unit packets. Parent Teacher Conferences for HS (Teacher Leader/All teachers/School leader). Families will receive syllabus with course deadlines for unit packets. Families will be informed of how ELA, Algebra, Geometry and Algebra II (Common Core) courses affect their child’s progress towards graduation. Algebra and ELA progress reports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will use the professional learning time two Mondays per month to meet by department to collaborate in the creation of lesson plans and to perform curricular work guided by the Lead Teachers of Math and ELA. Math and ELA teachers will be sent to professional development provided by NIMSI, Brooklyn North and our superintendency. ALEKS will be purchased for use in mathematics classes to use data to create individualized student learning plans. Per session will be paid to teachers for after school tutoring in Algebra and ELA as well as Saturday sessions to be held leading up to the January regents examinations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administer a series of 3 benchmark assessments (strategically created to match the curricula, key standards) in order to determine and monitor student progress in acquisition of skills. October 2018 - Administration of Baseline Assessment December 2018 - Benchmark 1 March 2019 - Benchmark 2 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 Performance Assessments baseline and benchmarks in Algebra and ELA. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Observations of interactions of staff- to- students and students- to- students, interview with students and feedback from school-made surveys indicate that the vast majority of our students are happy to be in School for Classics. A large number of students participate of the many after-school activities offered advised by our own teachers. We are overjoyed by the tremendous jump in scores reflected in the 2017-18 Survey in the area of Supportive Environment (from 2.51 to 3.71!). The score finally reflects the special 'homey' feeling that our school emanates. The growth within each component was: Supportive Environment from 2.44 to 3.73, Guidance from 2.38 to 3.63, Peer Support for Academic Work from 2.48 to 3.57, Personal Attention and Support from 2.80 to 3.73, Safety from 2.00 to 3.33, Socio-Emotional from 2.95 to 4.09 (!) and for Preventing Bullying 3.92 out of 4. All sub-components' scores outperformed the borough average and city average. In the area of Peer Support of Academic Work, 62% of students responded 'that most students feel it is important to come to school every day'. This attitude is reflected in our school's overall attendance which hovered around the low eighty percent. Most significantly, only 48.2% of our students have an attendance rate of 90 or better. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to increase the percentage of students' who have a percentage of ninety or above attendance from 48.2 to approximately 53%, 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Attendance contests/challenges will be held by grade level, classes, advisory groups for best attendance. students Attendance Team will hold home visits and neighborhood meetings to help families integrate with the school community. Workshops will be held by CBO 100 Schools to work with parents on transitioning into high school and the importance of attendance. Parents, September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Members Attendance Team Members, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Principal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first SLT meeting of the year, we will review responses of the 2018 Survey. The principal will request that the PA president and UFT representative meet with their constituents in order to inform them of the goal and to solicit their feedback which will be the subject of discussion (and action plan development) in subsequent SLT meetings. Additionally, we will use social media venues such as Twitter and Instagram in order to broadcast school events and messages that will inform and guide our parents in respect to issues pertaining to this goal. Parents will receive monthly letter on student attendance percentages, parents whose student has 100% attendance will be awarded with a certificate of recognition for their dedication as a guardian on promoting the importance of attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Integral attendance team members: Principal, Guidance Counselors, PPS Secretary, Attendance Teacher, and Parent Coordinator. Attendance Awards and Incentives through the use of consolidated funds. 2018-19 CEP 19  The use of software for parental contact such as School Messenger and Pupilpath, and School ConXt. The use of Parental Outreach time on Tuesdays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February of 2019, we expect a 2% increase over 50.6%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the RYIS report from ATS to monitor our status on a monthly basis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For two years in a row, the corresponding section was the highest scored in the School Quality Survey. 100 percent of our teachers look forward to coming to work and 100 percent indicated that they talk to each other about instruction. The Collaborative Teachers' section scored +.91 above the borough average and +.87 above the city average. Our teachers have engaged in numerous professional learning opportunities and are knowledgeable about the common core learning standards and respective curricula. However, classroom observations, lesson plans and assessments results reveal that using grade level curriculum in a way that is understood by ALL students continues to be a challenge for some teachers. Ninety five percent of teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching but only 68 % indicated that they are eager to try new ideas. Preliminary regents' results for 2018 show that many of our students struggle to pass specific subject area Regents' exams and only a handful earn scores of eighty five or above in regents exams. As a result, for school year 2018-19, we are instituting baseline and benchmark assessments in each subject area in order to do a better job of monitoring student progress throughout the year. These school-wide uniform assessments (periodic assessments) will fuel teacher team meetings leading to the interventions, differentiations, entry points and modifications that work as evidenced by scores on those assessments and subsequent regents' results in those subject areas. We will be hyper-focused on moving students who are 'low to middle' in order to obtain better passing results in credit accumulation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will improve their use of data to create multiple entry points for students in their classes as evidenced by an increase in credit accumulation for year 2 students in the lowest third so that the gap and credit accumulation between all students and those in the lowest third from 10% to 5%. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop and facilitate a series of workshops/PD to analyze student achievement data and curricular materials in order to make connections between what is taught and how is taught. Pose problems of practice for each department with the intention of having teachers research and find solutions. These 'solutions' will be the subject of discussions and observations of practice (inquiry cycles). To provide department teams with protocols to assist them in using assessment results as a means of identifying instructional practices that will elevate student performance. Meet with department leads every two weeks to determine progress and next steps. Identify students in year 2,3 and 4 who are 'off track' in exams. Pinpoint the number of regent exams (and which exams are) necessary to contribute positively to this metric in order to monitor the academic status of these students matched to needed regents. Department teams, led by department leads, will identify (through research and best practices) specific instructional strategies to elevate student outcomes, work together to improve practice (developing criteria for practice, visiting and feedback to colleagues, coach visits, supervisory observations) to gauge whether selected strategies have impact. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September to May 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Teachers September though June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Department Leads and School Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first SLT meeting of the year, we will review responses of the 2018 Survey. The principal will request that the PA president and UFT representative meet with their constituents in order to inform them of the goal and to solicit their feedback which will be the subject of discussion (and action plan development) in subsequent SLT meetings. Additionally, we will use social media venues such as Twitter and Instagram in order to broadcast school events and messages that will inform and guide our parents in respect to issues pertaining to this goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assessments from Periodic Assessments System. Schoolnet. High School Tracker, RGCS report from ATS. Facilitation skills of Assistant Principals and Lead Teachers. Coaches from the Teacher Leadership Pathways and AP for ALL will support department leads. We will use common planning time twice a week and Monday's after school (twice a month) in order to execute this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January regents results will indicate movement towards this metric (Average Completion Rate for Remaining Regents). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents Results for January, June and August of 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Substantial increase in the score of Effective School Leadership was demonstrated in the 2018 Survey Results; from 3.77 to 4.18. 100% of faculty indicated that expectations are made clear and are set high for student learning and that a clear vision has been communicated to the school community. However, although 95% of teachers surveyed say that they designed instructional programs together, teacher ratings in 1E range from 1.59 to 3.25 indicating inconsistent quality across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leader will provide high quality professional learning to improve teacher practices as evidenced by an increase in average teacher rating in 1E from 2.5 to 2.7. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher leads will develop an inter-visitation schedule for teachers focused on elements of 1E. They will follow our established protocol for debrief and follow up. Teachers will have an opportunity to engage in professional discussions and adopt effective practices that will lead to overall improvement in pedagogy. School leader will facilitate a minimum of three professional development sessions designed to deepen understanding around competency 1E. The principal will develop a checklist/rubric for 1E that will be used in PDs and classroom observations to monitor implementation of strategies and progress. Teachers will be provided support which will vary depending on their tiered level. New teachers and teachers in Tier 3 will be monitored for improvements. School leader will facilitate a book study with her cabinet and, it turn, assistant principals will turn key to their respective teachers. A leadership consultant will work closely with the Lead Teachers in order to further polish their capacity to lead. The principal will model how to design, coordinate and facilitate professional development and will personally support the growth of teacher leads. School leaders will provide time during the regular school day to allow for teachers to meet in small groups, to prepare for inter-visitations and to debrief. In addition, the principal will provide teacher leads with the time and space necessary to meet frequently and to turn key to the faculty overall trends and patterns found as they relate to competency 1E and the school's instructional focus. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers October to March 2019 Department Leads and Assistant Principals Teachers Principal September 2018 - February 2019 AP, Lead teachers September 2018 Principal Instructional leads, and teachers October to May 2019 Assistant principal and principal, leadership consultant Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 2018-19 CEP 25  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first SLT meeting of the year, we will review responses of the 2018 Survey. The principal will request that the PA president and UFT representative meet with their constituents in order to inform them of the goal and to solicit their feedback which will be the subject of discussion (and action plan development) in subsequent SLT meetings. Additionally, we will use social media venues such as Twitter and Instagram in order to broadcast school events and messages that will inform and guide our parents in respect to issues pertaining to this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders will emphasize elements of 3B through conversations, feedback, PD, observations, etc. in order to support effective practice within teacher teams and classroom instruction. Professional learning sessions on Mondays will frequently be dedicated to review, discuss, plan and collaborate around elements of 3B (and, of course, as they relate to other competencies). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In November and February, we will use the checklist/rubric to assess the status of Tier II and Tier III teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Checklist/Rubric of the elements of 3B. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although our school enjoys a good relationship with our community and families , we continue to seek increased parental involvement and connection with our parents. The most recent School Quality guide indicates an increase in the overall score within the Survey category from 2.51 to 3.71. While there was a 5% increase in the percentage of parents who responded to the survey in the 2017-18, we are still ten points behind the city average rate of participation. Responses to the survey indicate a degree of parental involvement that is necessary in order to capture survey responses that better represent the feelings and perceptions our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to increase the percentage of parents who respond to the Framework Survey from 27 to a minimum of 40%. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At the beginning of the year, the guidance counselors will Parents and guardians By October 2018 Guidance counselors conduct a two-day orientation in August and September for all incoming freshmen and their parents in order to disclose this goal and the opportunities that we have for parental support. SLT will devise concrete ways in which parents can support our school. These will be communicated to parents through social media, mailings, calls, in -person, and other type of advertisements. Also, we will ensure that students are well aware of these opportunities through the use of our hallway monitors, social media and town halls. School leaders will discuss (and periodically reinforce) the importance of maintaining a welcoming and nurturing environment for families throughout our school. Greater awareness of other languages and cultures will include making better use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. At least two times a year, our school will solicit the support of parents in the production of student activities or other types of collaboration such as chaperoning, fundraising, etc. These events will be advertised and will take place at convenient times so that a maximum of parents are able to participate. We will establish a centralized school-wide system of communication through the comprehensive use of Pupil Path and Tweeter. The principal will set the expectation that every teacher must use the system weekly; not only to enter grades, track homework, and other record-keeping necessities, but to communicate student behavior and other details to parents through the system and through an App. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and guardians By January 2019 Parent coordinator School staff September 2018 and monthly thereafter Principal and assistant principals Parents and guardians Two times in the 2018-19 year. Teachers and assistant principals Teachers and Parents August and September 2018 and bi-weekly thereafter Principal and assistant principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. During the first SLT meeting of the year, we will review responses of the 2018 Survey. The principal will request that the PA president and UFT representative meet with their constituents in order to inform them of the goal and to 2018-19 CEP 28  solicit their feedback which will be the subject of discussion (and action plan development) in subsequent SLT meetings. Additionally, we will use social media venues such as Twitter and Instagram in order to broadcast school events and messages that will inform and guide our parents in respect to issues pertaining to this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator. Part-time office translator. Use of PupilPath and the provision of workshops to parents in order to take full advantage of the system. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, we will assess progress by increasing the number of families who follow us on social media from 99 in June 2018. Also, two of our major yearly events will be heavily supported by our parents. This support could take the form of planning, coordination, facilitation of activities, fundraising, and/or contributing their time and/or resources. Additionally, we will survey our parents in February of 2019 to assess their response rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who receive scores of 60 or below BEFORE marking periods end. Students who enter our school with a proficiency level below 2. Students who fail any English course from 1 through 6 orthe English Regents. Students who receive scores of 60 or below BEFORE marking periods end. Students who enter our school with a proficiency level below 2. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading comprehension, writing and verbal communication is aided through a combination of teachers’ use of: explicit teaching of the writing process, annotation skills, chunking of text, use of sentence frames, use of engaging texts, the teaching of grammar, use of Plato and Reading Plus (when appropriate) and Review of regents questions. Teachers meet with students to strengthen their test taking skills, to practice regents’ questions pertaining to students’ areas of difficulty. Plato online is used to reinforce what is taught. Regents’ preparation classes are also part of the assistance provided. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups (5-10) Reduced sized classes When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 8th period tutoring 2 days a week After school tutoring on Wed and Thursdays. One to one (or one to two) Small groups (5-10) Reduced sized classes Saturday sessions (6 in the fall and 6 in the spring) In-class support by differentiation of instruction. 8thperiod tutoring 2 days a week After school tutoring on Wed and Thursdays. One to one (or one to two) Saturday sessions (6 in the fall and 6 in the spring) 2018-19 CEP 30  Science Social Studies Students who fail Algebra orthe AlgebraRegents. Students who receive scores of 60 or below BEFORE marking periods end. Students who failLiving Environment and Earth Science Regents (or Chemistry) Students off track to meet laboratory requirements Students who receive scores of 60 or below BEFORE marking periods end. Students who failGlobal/US History Regents Teachers meet with students to strengthen their test taking skills, to practice regents’ questions pertaining to students’ areas of difficulty. Plato online is used to reinforce what is taught. Regents’ preparation classes are also part of the assistance provided. Teachers meet with students to strengthen their test taking skills, to practice regents’ questions pertaining to students’ areas of difficulty. Plato online is used to reinforce what is taught. Regents’ preparation classes are also part of the assistance provided. In-class support by differentiation of instruction. 8thperiod tutoring 2 days a week After school tutoring on Wed and Thursdays. Small groups (5-10) Reduced sized classes One to one (or one to two) Small groups (5-10) Reduced sized classes Saturday sessions (6 in the fall and 6 in the spring) In-class support by differentiation of instruction. 8thperiod tutoring 2 days a week After school tutoring on Wed and Thursdays. One to one (or one to two) Saturday sessions (6 in the fall and 6 in the spring) In-class support by differentiation of instruction. Mostly during school hours throughout the day depending on students’ schedules At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Students in temporary housing, students whose general education Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), Resource room and Small groups (5-10) 2018-19 CEP 31 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) students whose behavior is concerning, students dealing with loss, students who are absent frequently, students who are not demonstrating academic progress despite efforts to support them academically, LGBTQstudents. counseling services are provided to students by the counselor, psychologist, and social worker. Students who do not have IEPs meet with school’s counselor and respective advisors as often as needed. Reduced sized classes and needs. After school only on appointment basis. One to one (or one to two) 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have a total of 23 (7.66%) students in temporary housing. 7 students are doubled up, 13 are in shelters, 3 are in an other temporary living situation. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students who are STH meet frequently with one of the guidance counselors in order for them to provide the students with emotional support and to teach them how to handle conflict and maintain a positive outlook despite circumstances. This year, through our partnership with 100 Schools, we will have a full time mental health liaison in our school who will be able to support not only the student but also their families. Also new this year, is the addition of a parent coordinator to our staff who will be specifically assigned to monitor our families and the living situation of our STH students throughout the year. At the beginning of the year, STH students receive school supplies, a book bag, clothing and toiletries. Throughout the year, we replenish these materials and clothing as needed. Priority of counselors' time is given to STH students at any time during or after the school day. Tutoring is always available for them as well as transportation funds (metrocards). 2018-19 CEP 33  Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. *The principal maintains abreast of NYC Department of Education and New York State licensing and professional development requirements. *Through networking with DOE schools, using DOE systems such as the New Teacher Finding, potential new teachers are identified. In collaboration with DOE human resources personnel, certification and credential requirements are assessed followed by demonstration lessons and interviews. *To ensure instruction by highly qualified staff, all hired instructors are licensed in their subject area, and receive professional development applicable to that subject area. *New teachers are partnered with teacher colleagues for guidance and mentoring. *Teachers that are not highly qualified are supported with tuition reimbursement assistance so that they may complete necessary coursework to become highly qualified. *Teachers attend out-of-building professional development to ensure familiarity with most current research and resources. *All teachers work under the guidance of Departmental Instructional Leads, assistant principals and the principal. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning opportunities revolve primarily around the school’s instructional focus of developing students’ literacy skills through teacher emphasis and use of authentic literacy; a holistic approach to reading, writing and discussion in order to sharpen thinking skills. Professional development is offered school wide twice a month. Faculty learning sessions are designed to further our teachers’ skills and knowledge around authentic literacy and also to develop their pedagogical skills around challenging competencies within the Danielson Framework such as 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 2018-19 CEP 35  3C: Engaging Students in Learning. Twice a month teachers engage in departmental professional learning opportunities which are facilitated by teachers. Paraprofessionals benefit from the same learning experiences as their teacher colleagues. Our school benefits from having a Peer Collaborative and two model teachers who support our teachers in a concrete way such as arranging visits to our lab classroom and coordinating inter-visitations. Our school also seeks to maintain the professional support of a leadership and educational consultant, Christopher Facey, who has partnered with the principal to design a long term improvement plan for the school around the effective use of common assessments to modify curriculum and instruction. Content specific professional development is delivered through the Brooklyn Support Center. Teachers have been strategically assigned to relevant PDs to further their content knowledge as well as their repertoire of strategies. In terms of leadership, both assistant principals are mentored by administrative members from the CSA. The principal also participates from professional development provided by her superintendent, central DOE and outside organizations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 36  The school has an assessment committee that meets several times in the school year (MOSL) to study, discuss and recommend assessments in each subject area that are in alignment with the school’s emphasis on writing and the coursework offered at the school. Our school administers common assessments regularly (unit exams) which are developed collaboratively within departments. However, the main form of assessment that takes place in our school is formative. Our teachers have (and will continue to) receive extensive training in the value and use of short, frequent formative assessments that, while not graded, are used to inform immediate instruction. Lastly, our professional development committee works hard to ensure that our school’s writing emphasis crosses over every subject area. To this effect, the committee is charged to work with their respective colleagues to design writing tasks that are argumentative or expository and that fit nicely within designated units. Once completed, teachers design lessons meant to build students’ content knowledge and writing skills necessary to accomplish the writing tasks successfully (according to a CCLS aligned rubric). Bi-weekly department meetings will continue to take place to discuss the results of academic assessments, implications for future instruction, and suggestions for tracking student progress. Teachers are encouraged to make suggestions for modifications to the instructional program including strategies for differentiating instruction, regrouping students based on teacher observations of student performance, and scaffolding instruction for at-risk students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 217780 0 12366 0 2,090497 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) See action plan See action plan See action plan 1Explanation/Background: 2018-19 CEP 37  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 38  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy for the School for Classics Parent and Family Engagement Policy This contract seeks to ensure effective involvement of parents and families with School for Classics (SFC). SFC, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association. Classic's parent involvement contract was written to better meet the needs of our students' families. The school community annually evaluates the programs and resources that we have in place and make available to parents in order to seek feedback that will inform actions toward improving services and communication. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent and teacher members of the school’s Parent -Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted and informed of the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. As a SWP school, Schools for Classics will support all of our parents and families by performing the following actions (non-exhaustive list): Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 1. Maintaining a welcoming and friendly school (particularly, our main office) where parents' queries are accurately answered and expedited services are the norm. 2018-19 CEP 40  2. Making full use of the services provided by the office of Translation and Interpretation from the NYCDOE. 3. Providing translated materials and having information readily available in several languages. 4. Ensuring that our parent coordinator has the knowledge and resources necessary to support and guide our families. 5. Providing professional development opportunities for school staff in order to continually improve our outreach, communication skills and cultural sensitivity in order to build stronger ties between parents. 6. Monitoring and revising the efficiency of the systems that we have in place that impact parent-school relationships (intake -discharge process, provision of letters, transcripts, etc). In order to continually improve the frequency and quality of parental involvement, Classics' High School will, at a minimum, commit to: Parental Involvement and School Quality 1. Maintain on staff a parent coordinator and a part- time translator to directly support our parents. The Spanish-speaking translator will serve as liaison between parents and school staff who do not speak Spanish. The parent coordinator will coordinate and facilitate parent workshops and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all families. The parent coordinator will maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month, and maintain reports up to date. 2. Create and circulate a parent calendar of events and important dates with information (SLT and PA meetings, school performances, award nights, etc.) 3. Continue to engage parents in the planning, reviewing and evaluating of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in this document to include the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds. 4. Provide a Principal's report of all school academic initiatives to include the state of curriculum, the work of teacher teams, professional development given to teachers and to create awareness among families of our school's instructional focus or 'reading, writing and discussion'. 5. Provide workshops and informational sessions of relevance and interest to our community on a frequent basis. 6. Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting or before October 30, 2017 to advise parents about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; 7. Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. Besides hosting Parent Association, Title I and SLT meetings, School for Classics plans to enhance our parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 1. Ensuring that all of our parents have access to their login information for PupilPath and the new DOE system in order for them to have access to their children's attendance and academic information. 2. Encourage parents to visit our school on Tuesdays after school during the designated parent engagement time. 2018-19 CEP 41  3. Host educational and fun family events (besides the mandated four meetings) throughout the school year such as (1) Advanced Placement celebration and information dinner; (2) ELL family night; (3) Talent shows; (4) Black History month student performance; (4) Mother's day beauty day; (5) BBQ day and others. 4. Encourage meaningful parent participation and initiative on School Leadership Teams, Parent -Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. 5. Provide progress reports frequently and make daily phone calls in regard to attendance, behavior and academic progress. 6. Create and distribute a monthly school newsletter designed to keep parents informed about school activities as well as to encourage our parents to follow us on social media outlets. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) School for Classics , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting two parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● planning activities for parents during the school year in addition to traditional Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Ssupporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities Understand that daily attendance is a basic responsibility and key to being successful in school. Understand that arriving to school on time is a commitment that is necessary in order to pass early morning classes. Complete academic tasks during and after school in order to learn the required content and skills and to acquire a minimum of ten academic credits per year. Be involved in school activities during and after school in order to benefit from a full high school experience. Treat my peers and teachers with respect. Maintain the school clean. 2018-19 CEP 44  Be kind and respectful to students from our Campus schools. Act safely and follow school and classroom rules. Actively take advantage of our school's college office and ensure that college applications and financial aid applications are sent on time. Actively make the most of our school's advisory time . 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year, our program expanded to serve a total of 79 English Language Learners (including students at the commanding level) or from having a population of 11% ELLs to a little bit more than 18%. There are 28 students in 9th grade, 18 students in 10th grade, 18 students in 11th grade, and 6 students in 12th grade. Understanding the structure of the English language, listening activities paired with visuals and fostering verbal interactions are critical at the entering and emerging level. To this end, supplemental after school instruction will provide much needed additional academic exposure through specially designed activities. The after school program for ELLs takes place every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:20 to 4: 00 pm. The program begins in October and will run through May for a total of 49 sessions. This 'extra time' is added to the students' schedule as a required component of their academic schedule. The After school services are provided to all grade and proficiency levels of ELL students in various ways. Students are offered academic intervention in English and Spanish by the certified ENL teacher Ms. DeLeon and the paraprofessional Mrs. Richards to aide in the class and support program. The Title III after school program adds much needed instructional time for our ELL students to advance their literacy skills while at the same time helps to establish a collaborative, positive and trusting culture. The third feature of our school's supplemental program is the use of Q-Tell strategies to support reading, writing, and discussion progress for our English learners. Ms. Deleon, our ELL teacher, and Ms. Tancredi, ELL supervisor, received training in Q-Tell Strategies. Students receive vocabulary instruction, modified writing tasks, leveled texts with text-dependent questions, delivered with scaffolding techniques. On Saturdays, we offer Regents' preparation classes. The ELA and ESL teachers coordinate instruction in order to provide test preparation for our ELLs. Saturday school runs from 12/10/18 to 1/21/19 for a total of six sessions. In the spring, Saturday sessions run from April 27th, 2019 to June 8th, 2019 for a total of 7 sessions. Sessions are three hours long (9 to 12 pm). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our sole ENL teacher, Assistant principal, paraprofessional, and English department participate of required professional development provisioned by Reading Plus personnel. The purpose of these trainings is to diagnose reading problems through the use and 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development monitoring of the software. There are three formal trainings for approximately two hours each; so far, two trainings have taken place. We anticipate an additional training in the spring of 2018. In order to share her expertise and knowledge and skills, our ESL teacher is facilitating a three series PD for our faculty to take place on the following Mondays from . Faculty Professional Development Sessions planned for this year around ELL instruction are the following: 1. How to scaffold texts for ELLs and assess comprehension? December 10th from 2:40 to 4:00 pm 2. How to create worthwhile tasks for entering and emerging ELLs? How to scaffold extended writing tasks for ELL students? January 15th from 2:40 to 4:00 pm 3. How to use anchor and process charts, technology and other visuals to convey concepts? February 4th from 2:40 to 4:00 pm. As it is customary in our school, agendas, sign in sheets and resources shared during learning lessons are kept on file in the Principal's office. By engaging in these professional developments, and holding teachers accountable for their implementation, we hope that our teachers will be better able to effectively support our growing ELL population.. Our ENL teacher and Principal will attend out-of-building professional development workshops offered through Brooklyn North and Central DOE. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLS must be given a comprehensive understanding of the support required, at home and in school, for their children to succeed at the high school level and beyond. During monthly PTA meetings, parents of ELLs learn what is required for their children to succeed academically, socially, and emotionally, in the high school community and beyond. The ENL Teacher and Guidance Counselors meet with ELL parents individually (or by phone conferences) to review academic progress and discuss graduation requirements throughout the year. We offer workshops in areas such as computer literacy, general financial and academic literacy, how to become more involved in the school community, and the type of ESL instruction their children are receiving, depending on their level. We will continue to use our bilingual staff members, Google translate and translation services for all parental contact, when needed. Activities will be communicated to the parents through written correspondence in school mailings, in the native language, as well as through email and phone. The following workshops are scheduled to take place: 1. October - ELL Family Night (Learn about the NYSESLAT and CR Part-154) 6 to 7pm 2. December 20 - Winter Extravaganza - Cultural awareness during the holidays 5:30 to 8 pm 3. April 4 - Getting ready for the NYSESLAT 6 to 7 pm 4. May 23 - AP for ALL (Advanced Placement workshop) for ELL parents and students 6 to 7 pm 2018-19 CEP 48 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Our parent coordinator and language access coordinator, in conjunction with the administration and guidance staff, plans the activities and organizes the correspondence to ensure that parents are aware of school events and related activities. Parents are sent invitations in both English and their home language, students are given invitations to bring to their parents, dates of upcoming workshops are printed in the parent newsletter every month, and phone calls are made home. The Assistant Principal keeps a binder of all sign in sheets, meeting invitations, and agendas. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) na  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL na na na na na na Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. na na na na na na na 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name School for Classics Borough Brooklyn School Number 683 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deborah Afanador Soukar Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. J. Deleon/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Chambers/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Cavanaugh/Social Studies Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Nicole Tancredi Coach NA School Counselor Marcos Garcia Lazette Moore Parent Margarita Torres Parent Coordinator Ivory Ellison Field Support Center Staff Member Alison Shehann Other (Name and Title) Cira Herrera, Translator C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 299 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.41% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. na na na na na na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the results of teacher created assessments to determine the literacy skills of our students. Additionally, we review state exams results such as include the NYSESLAT and the Regents' ELA. In addition, the New York City Performance Assessment Common Rubric as it relates to argumentative and literary analysis writing has been incorporated in our assessment scheme. Early data reveals that generally, our ELL’s are weak in writing and reading comprehension. In the writing modality, weaknesses have been identified especially in the area of complex sentence structure, the use of academic vocabulary, the use of transitions and the ordering of ideas and information to write coherently. Students also have difficult in developing counterclaims in argumentative essays. Additionally students have difficulty in analyzing rhetorical devices used to determine the author's purpose. 2018-19 CEP 51  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teachers are integrated within the ELA department; every Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays during 8th period and every other Monday after school to co-plan and curriculum plan collaboratively. The ENL teachers work closely with the Model teacher to modify the curriculum for the ENL students. The Assistant Principal meets with the ELA department to review data and discuss adjustments based on data. The principal meets with the model teacher weekly to review data and discuss implementation of changes where necessary. In addition, professional development meetings are held to strengthen instructional practices that support the ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The primary manner in which we determine the appropriateness of our program is by how students do on the ELA Regents and the NYSESLAT. We monitor ELL academic progress by the quality of their work as it progresses (or not) throughout the year. We also monitor their interaction with other students, their increased level of confidence when interacting with non-ELL students and teacher-student relationships. We find that there is a strong correlation between their 'happiness' in school and acquisition of the English language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teachers are integrated within the ELA department; everyday 8th period and every other Monday after school to co-plan and curriculum plan collaboratively. The ENL teachers work closely with the Model teacher to modify the curriculum for the ENL students. The Assistant Principal meets with the ELA department to review data and discuss adjustments based on data. The principal meets with the model teacher weekly to review data and discuss implementation of changes where necessary. The data from the NYSESLAT and Regents exams are used to program students based on their academic needs to better service the students so they can improve class credit, NYSESLAT, and Regent exam scores. We have implemented tutoring during student lunch, after school, and regents prep. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the data pattern from the NYSITTEL indicates the need for more planning across the four modalities with our newly arrived and entering students. Our intermediate and advanced ELLs (now Transitioning and Expanding) have performed better in the areas of speaking and listening than reading and writing. Based on test data, our school has more than 50% of their ELLs identified as Entering. As a result, the school is implementing several literacy initiatives with emphasis on writing. This includes literacy across content areas - reinforcing writing and vocabulary skills, text annotation, and supports that are specific to those at the Entering level. A number of workshops have already been conducted with teachers who are guided with specific strategies to help struggling writers and readers. Teachers use this information to guide curricular choices and daily lesson planning for all kids in all subject classes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teachers are integrated within the ELA department; everyday 8th period and every other Monday after school to co-plan and curriculum plan collaboratively. The ENL teachers work closely with the Model teacher to modify the curriculum for the ENL students. The Assistant Principal meets with the ELA department to review data and discuss adjustments based on data. The principal meets with the model teacher weekly to review data and discuss implementation of changes where necessary. After the data is analyzed by the ENL teacher, content teachers, and administration, the instruction and curriculum is adjusted based on students needs. We focus on areas of weaknesses while building on the students areas of strength. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 52  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students are grouped by grade level to receive their necessary high school classes. Content area classes are populated by ELLs of all levels and non- ELLs. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 of standalone ENL instruction per week. ELLs of all levels receive the mandated number of minutes of Part 154 -2 (9-12), Entering will receive 180 min. of Integrated ELA and 180 min. of integrated content area, Emerging students will receive 180 min. of Integrated ELA and 90 min. of integrated Content area, Transitioning students will receive 180 min of integrated content area, Expading students will receive 180 min. of integrated content area, and commanding students will receive 90 min of integrated content which is provide by content area teachers and a TESOL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL standalone is 180 minutes per week. Additionally, entering students receive 180 of integrated ENL in ELA/Social Studies and emerging receive 180 minutes of Integrated ELA. Transitioning students receive 90 min. of integrated instruction and Expanding students receive a total of 180 minutes per week and commanding students receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered primarily in English although some instructional materials and assignments are provided in the students' native language. Entering and emerging ELL students are paired with peers who have more domain of the English language for support. Entering and emerging students are encouraged to submit assignments in their native language. Students are provided with dictionaries and the school has purchased electronic translators to enhance communication. Our teachers emphasize classroom routines beginning with making the purpose of the unit/ lesson clear to students. Visuals represented in charts, posters, and documents are used commonly in our school. Vocabulary in content is presented daily to our ELL students and opportunities for them to write and talk are daily routines to encourage their conversational skills in English. Sentence starters and prompts are used often but in particular to aid ELL students organize their thinking and to support them in their writing and when they respond verbally to questions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the year ELL's are encouraged to use their native language to support their second language acquisition.They are also evaluated in their native language by means of a number of instruments including the Rossetta Stone computer software Projects and quizzes involving the use of native language are also utilized to determine their proficiency. These initiatives are undertaken with parental support. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 53  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction in the ESL classroom is differentiated for each sub group. The ELL subgroups include SIFE students, newcomers who have been in US schools for less than three years, ELLs who have been receiving ESL services for 4 to 6 years, the Long-Term ELLs and former ELLs who have tested proficient. a. Plan for SIFE-- to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program; to design individualized student study plans and to provide native language support whenever feasible. b. Plan for newcomers-- when a new student is registered at the School for Classics, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: - an informal student orientation - use of the buddy system to help ease transition -small group instruction to teach "survival English" and content specific language - additional support to help them get ready for formal assessment c. Plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years: - analyze the data from NYSESLAT to find the strengths and weaknesses of each student. - differentiate instruction to meet their needs for learning -intensive practice in reading and writing d. Plan for Long-term ELLs: - analyze their performance data to understand their weaknesses and devise strategies to help them - provide them with after school programs - Provide them with additional materials to enrich their language and academic skills e Plan for former ELL's -Former ELL's are supported to facilitate their transition into the mainstream classroom. In addition they are provided with bilingual dictionaries and extra time on state tests for two additional years.aste response to questions here: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies used include the use of technology, repeat instructions/directions, modify and or shorten assignments to ensure success, provide opportunities for cooperative learning, provide regular feed back, modelling and using graphic organizers. Content is also adapted based on students' different learning styles. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? School for Classics has expanded its co-teaching staff and additional emphasis is placed on instructional collaboration in order to meet the diverse needs of students with disability. In additions, bridges are encouraged in the content area curriculum to help students achieve goals set in their IEP. IEP goals are anchored on the Common Core/State Standards. In addition, general Education and Speacial education teachers are constantly reminded of Special Education students strengths, weaknesses and needs and they tailor instructions to meet these. The English proficiency of Special Education students are also enhanced in a general Education environmental setting which they share with regular education and ELLs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At School for Classics, ongoing intervention has been part of our educational process. ELL’s benefit from our Title III after school program on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:00 pm. This program targets emerging and entering ELLs and is led by Ms. Deleon (ENL teacher) and a language paraprofessional. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 54  For the new year new materials have been introduced. These include the One Goal project which is a college readiness program where ELL students will be recruited and involved in the project. Improvement is also envisaged in the area of content with the introduction of more non fiction materials to help students prepare for changes in the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents examinations. These texts include "Echoes from Mt. Olympus" from Perfection Learning the contents of which correlate with the New York ELA Core Standards and "Continental's New York ELL's" designed for the 2014 NYSESLAT . From this year, ELL’s will also be engaged in new units on argumentative writing, Literary analysis writing, cross content social studies incoporating skills for DBQ writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? While no program or services will be discontinued this year, the stand alone service is being limited due to the guidelines. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL’s are afforded equal access in every aspect of school life including participation in school clubs, extracurricular activities and school trips. Among the clubs available for their participation are music, theater, stem, and culinary club. Ell's also receive after school instruction by our ENL teacher. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL classroom is now equipped with computers and a printer to facilitate students multimedia presentations. Our resources for the beginning and intermediate ELLs include the Rosseta Stone Computer Program, which is implemented with overhead projectors. The internet is also used to support classroom instruction. Internet based ESL programs such as Dave's ESL Café and Randall Cyber Listening Lab are used as additional support, especially for newcomers. In addition, our instructional materials include the Milestones and Vision series text which incorporates fiction and non-fiction reading and content based materials. For the advanced level ELLs, instructional materials are also aligned to the ELA curriculum and requirements of the Regents ELA and the core curriculum. Students focus on such literary works as "Lord of the Flies" "A Long Way Gone," "Bodega Dreams". In addition to texts and other resources, examination materials for the NYS Regents in the content areas are used to supplement teaching and learning. in addition all students are provided with translation dictionaries to help them with all subject areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As part of the ENL program, students are encouraged to use materials, ideas and experiences from their native language in order to facilitate their language development. Bilingual dictionaries in Spanish, Bengali, Haitian Creole, Punjabi, Urdu, and Arabic as well as literature reflecting the cultural background of our students are also utilized as supplementary materials. In addition, low beginners use the Google translator and electronic language translator to help translate content from their first language into English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our materials correspond to ELL’s age and grade level. This is reflected particularly in reading materials and the level of texts complexity. Texts are chosen based on lexile ranges and which match the Common Core Standards as well as the proficiency and grade levels of ELL's. Various support is provided to the Ell students, these include tutoring for the subject areas and regents to help students progress. Plato Web is used for credit acquisition for specific students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL classroom is now equipped with computers to facilitate students multimedia presentations. Our resources for the beginning and intermediate ELLs include the Rosseta Stone Computer Program, which is implemented with overhead projectors. The internet is also used to support classroom instruction. In addition, our instructional materials include text which incorporates fiction and non-fiction reading and content based materials. For the advanced level ELLs, instructional materials are aligned to the ELA curriculum and requirements of the Regents ELA and the core curriculum. Advanced level students focus on such literary works as "Lord of the Flies" "Nector in a Sieve," "The Diary of Anne Frank" and "The Pearl" and 2018-19 CEP 55  “Of Mice and Men,” by John Steinbeck. In addition to texts and other resources, examination materials for the NYS Regents in the content areas are used to supplement teaching and learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled Ell students are assigned to a peer student as part of the peer program to help new Ells acclimate to the school, in addition all students are programmed into an advisory class where they become familiar with the overall school and classmates. Upon enrollment, ELL’s and their parents are provided with relevant information about the school system and services available before the commencement of the school year. Further, we try to assign a ‘buddy’ to our newcomers within the first week, a responsible classmate who usually speaks the same native language. This helps the newcomers to become familiar with their new school environment and the facilities available. With two advisory classes every week, ELLs are also given the opportunity to integrate with mainstream students and enhance their language skills through informal and formal activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school currently offers Spanish to all our students and encourages ELLs to take the LOTE exam in a language they feel comfortable with. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is planned for the entire 2018-2019 school year to take place every Monday. The sessions involve content area staff from every department as well as the teachers of ELL's . The workshops focus on such topics as the New York State Common Core Standards, Universal Design for Learning , curriculum development and the new teacher's evaluation system. The ESL teachers also meet with subject area teachers, Special Education and and Paraprofessionals and disseminate classroom materials for math, social studies, and science. Also distributed is information of all resources available to ELL students and teachers. In addition, our deans, guidance counselor, secretary and community coordinator are given opportunities for Professional Development related to ELL’s. We also send teachers of ELL's to outside workshops organized by Brooklyn North. We also send teachers of ELL's to outside workshops organized by the Office of English Language. Recent workshops included those workshops organized by Soeurette C. Fougère, Ph.D. Director of Student Support Services English Language Learners, Children First Network 611 which dealt with UDL, the New City Wide Expectations the New York State Common Core Standards. These sessions are helping teachers of ELL's to deliver Common Core aligned instructions and Q-Tell. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 56  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At the opening of the school year, teaching and other staff are briefed about incoming freshmen and their expectations. The background and academic records of ELL's in particular who come from the Middle School are examined to understand their needs.In this way staff are able to help them transition from middle school to high school.aste response to question here: The teaching staff at School for Classics is given many opportunities to attend professional development, pertaining to ELL's, throughout the school year. Training by the ENL teacher is ongoing, and most teachers have their mandated 7.5 hours of ESL training. A record of workshops attended by staff is kept in individual teachers' portfolios. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELL's are part of our school community. They attend open school meetings in which they discuss with teachers issues relating to the education of their children. When convenient parents of ELL's also attend Parent Teachers Meeting. A parent orientation is offered at the beginning of the school year for new students, during which the ENL and other teachers answer questions and give valuable information about important events and tests each student must take at the beginning of the year. We also involve parents by sending home bilingual letters to inform them of the curriculum their children are following and the tests they are required to take. These activities are conducted in the native language if necessary. The ENL teacher and/or a bilingual teacher assist in these areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We plan various events for our parents throughout the school year. These events include; ELL Family Night, Theatrical events performed by our students, Meet the Teacher Night, Freshmen Orientation, PTA. The Guidance Counselors organize individual parent meetings with students and their parents to discuss academic issues and personal goals for the school year. Translations are provided by bilingual staff during the meeting. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deborah Afanador-Soukar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School for Classics School DBN: 19K683 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deborah Schaefer Title Principal Nicole Tancredi Assistant Principal Ivory Ellison Ms. De Leon Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ms. Chambers/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Cavanaugh/SS Teacher/Subject Area Marcos Garcia and Lazette Moor Donald Conyers Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Cira Herrera Other Translator/Support Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/21/15 10/21/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19k683 School Name: School for Classics Superintendent: DonaldConyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Tancredi Deleon Assistant Principal Teacher conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes Yes Nicole Janette * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Survey is administered to all incoming student. All students are given an emergency card, which also indicates their preferred language. Information is logged into ATS and the preferred language data is kept in the ELL binder in the Guidance Office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 60  Language Written Preferred Bengali, Spanish Arabic Creole Bengali Spanish Arabic creole Oral Preferred Percent Written Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, Bengali Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Orientation Invitations - August, Pupil Path Log-In information - September, Parent/Teacher Conferences - September, October, March, Progress reports/Report Cards - October, November, December, January, March, April, May, and June. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 61  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Meet the teacher night, ELL Family Night, Parent/Teacher conferences, One-on-one meetings with ELL parents throughout the year, Science Fair, Performances, Senior avtivities. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our home messenger service and Pupilpath offer translation services. We use over the phone translation services and staff available who is bilingual. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On November 27th, 2018 a faculty PD is dedicated to ELL compliance and implications for classroom teachers. Our school ELL team works closely and daily with our faculty and the assistant principal of ELL supervision ensures that ELL families are aware of their rights, provides with with resources and makes them feel welcomed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide parents (whose primary language is not English) with translation for documents regarding health, safety, legal/disciplinary matters, and entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learners or non-standard academic program. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 62  100% of surveyed parents in 2016-17 Learning Environment Survey responded that we do a good job of communicating with them. We will continue to administer in-house parent surveys and ensure that we receive verbal feedback from parents in an ongoing ba 2018-19 CEP 63 
