2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K691 School Name: FORT GREENE PREPARATORY ACADEMY Principal: PAULA LETTIERE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Fort Greene Preparatory Academy 13K691 NY331300010691 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 100 Clermont Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11205 718 254 9401 718 254 9407 Phone Number: Denise Harrison Fax: dharrison2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Paula Lettiere Joseph Amoako MichelleYardeJasmin MyrianneSalomon SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: VenaAnderson n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Barbara Freeman Superintendent: 355 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY 11238 Bfreeman6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: 718 636 3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (347) 225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Paula Lettiere Joseph Amoako Isaac Foles Shakia Williams Michelle Yarde-Jasmin *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marva Bovell Sonia Robertson Neil Davis AsiyaJoseph MyrianneSalomon Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Fort Greene Preparatory Academy is a progressive middle school that is entering its ninth year. Fort Green Preparatory Academy is a college preparatory school committed to providing an education of excellence that allows each student to develop intellectual independence, self-confidence and a sense of responsibility towards others both within the school and throughout the larger community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school will graduate future leaders, decision-makers and innovators empowered to solve the problems of the 21st Century. To meet this challenge, a rigorous inquiry-based curriculum will push students from foundational knowledge towards the problem solving and critical thinking necessary for success in college and beyond. Our school community has a diverse set of needs. Within our population of 250 students, 6% are English Language Learners, 72% are eligible for free and reduced lunch, 10% receive counseling services, 24% are students with disabilities, and 3% are student within temporary housing. The ethnic make of the school is diverse. 24% of students are Hispanic, 69% of students are Black, 2% are white, 2% are Asian/Pacific Islander, 1%American Indian/Alaskan Native, 1% Native Hawaiian, 1% multi-racial. Fort Greene Preparatory Academy is a school built on the belief that young people thrive when they feel they are included and have full access to rigorous learning. Therefore the model of instruction within the school is that of full inclusion, where all students are served in an inclusive classroom setting using an ICT model. The school is structured around an inquiry model where students engage in group problem solving and real world scenarios. Special services are taught mainly in a push-in model to ensure all students have access to rigorous curriculum. Our discipline model is restorative and supportive to ensure all students can successfully engage in quality thinking each day. The school has developed strategic partnerships with the Irondale Theater Ensemble and Strike Anywhere Theater Ensemble to engage students in theater techniques that build community and break down barriers to creating a positive inclusive environment. Scholars begin this work beginning in grade 6, where they use storytelling techniques to build empathy for those around them. Each grade continues to build community through these storytelling methods. We believe this type of work is essential in building confidence and authenticity in our scholars and empowering them to share their truth with the world. As a college preparatory school, Fort Greene Prep has built as strong elective model. All scholars are provided with foreign language instruction, computer technology instruction, and visual arts instruction. Based on student interest, students will engage in advance coursework in one of these areas. Students are provided with the opportunity to take the Living Environment and Algebra Regents and the Spanish Language Proficiency in grade 8. Students receive a solid foundation in computer technology from grade 6 that will enable them to enter college and career well prepared for the 21st Century. By exploring each of these tracks and being provided the opportunity to choose one to go deep into in their grade 8 year, we believe scholars voice and individuality is cultivated, preparing them to be authentically their best selves as they move to high school, college, and career. The school has developed strategic partnerships with University Settlement, who are the acting CBO for the Compass after school program that is offered in partnership with the Mayor’s initiative. University Settlement is an organization deeply invested within the community whose programs and services have been support our students for years. It was 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  a logical next step for the school to bring their successful work to the school to offer as after school programming. The partnership between the school and University Settlement allows scholars to receive comprehensive enrichment that ranges from physical activities like dance and sports, to dance, film, visual arts, theater, to competitive robotics. It also provides opportunities for academic intervention and homework help. Fort Greene Prep has recently developed a partnership with the Brooklyn Tech Pipeline Program. Eligible scholars receive intensive preparation for entry into the specialized high schools. This opportunity includes SHSAT preparation, and additional enrichment on Saturdays and throughout the summer. We have also developed a partnership with Brooklyn Tech where its student robotic team mentors our student robotic team. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. This year's Grade 6 had a disproportionate amount of students who were not proficient in math and ELA. As we analyzed our data we determined that this was solely due to skills gaps—missing content that they had previously not mastered. These students had limited exposure to academic language and struggled to demonstrate skills they had because the language of the test was prohibitive to them. Teacher teams worked throughout the 2017-2018 school year to norm academic language across content and present questions daily in the language of the test. As a result, students felt confident in showing what they knew on this round of State Testing. Many of our incoming students—SWDs, ELLs, and low performers—have been receiving AIS as part of a pull-out program. We work diligently with incoming grade 6 students to acclimate them to a larger group setting. This is essential to our college prep model so that all of our students are ready to participate in a regular high school and college setting. We have seen positive results in this work, especially over the course of three years. We have a large population of students who enter our school with a history of chronic absenteeism. Feeling welcome and included is a basic need for getting these students reinvested in school. Many of these students require family and guidance support. We have allocated funds to secure a full time guidance counselor to support this work. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school has made strong progress around Math pedagogy--aligning curriculum to standards and incorporating Common Core aligned, non-routine tasks into units to build rigor. The school has built up teachers teams and leveraged this to create more cohesion across the school, and to build positive culture among students. We have seen progress in supportive environment for students with disabilities, creating more opportunities for this population to have access to a rigorous curriculum in the least restrictive environment. We have actively revised our grading policy to empower students to the opportunity to demonstrate learning through a variety of means and to leverage our student-led conferences to formally present their learning publicly. We have implemented a systematic approach to looking at student data to help all teachers across contents/grades accurately assess where students are and what adjustments must be made to units and lessons to address and close skills gaps. To build trust within the staff we focused on reviewing curriculum and listening to the teacher needs to purchase materials that were rigorous and adaptable to meet various needs. We focused on meeting teacher needs for technology to further support this work. The principal increased direct communication with teachers and teams We will continue to focus on aligning all curriculum across the school to the Common Core Standards and to build units and lessons that are rigorous and promote multiple opportunities to show progress, and proficiency. The teams will deepen the data work with Looking at Student Work protocols to target and improve proficiency across all 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  subjects, and specifically Math and ELA. Teams will apply rigor alignment protocols to their planning to ensure high expectations and access to all. Through this rigor work, a specific focus will be on questioning and providing open-ended opportunities to demonstrate understanding and make thinking visible. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K691 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 201 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 7 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 84.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 28.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.18 0% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 88.7% 5.0% 32.8% 62.2% 5.5% 1.5% 2 29% 7.8 12.1% 49% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The current population consists of 57% boys and 43% girls. 22% of the population are students with disabilities. This population requires a dynamic hands-on, high interest curriculum that has multiple entry points to meet diverse needs. Based on our most recent SQR, globally we need to strengthen 1.2 Pedagogy and 2.2 Assessment. During the 2017-2018 school year we observed that 90% of discipline and guidance referrals were due to lack of communication skills of students. Our school survey states that only 40% of teachers are building discussion regularly in classrooms. To increase rigor within the classroom, as well as engage students at various levels, this year we will build discussion routines in the classroom centered on rigorous, open-ended questioning. We will continue to align our planning with the standards and build fluency in our students the academic language and the language of the test. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 70% of students will have increased scores by one level on ELA and Math portfolio performance tasks including ELLs and SWDs as measured by teacher created portfolio tasks based on teachers providing daily opportunity to engage students in discourse and debate. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher team book study—Questioning for Discussion Walsh & Sattesand A Quick & Dirty Guide to Decreasing Teacher Talk and Increasing Student Talk in the Classroom Teitelbaum Monday PD cycles on discussion techniques and practices Sept-Nov Principal teacher teams Teacher Teams, Paras Teacher Teams Sept-Dec Principal, AP Sept-Dec Principal, AP Grade Team and Content team learning walks—peer assessment of discussion practices and norming Training and implementation of Word Generation in ELL class ELL Teacher Sept Creation of bilingual debate team—setting up sequence of lessons, timeline, structure Ell, Spanish teacher Sept Principal Principal Debate training for bilingual team, test matches, intervisitation to MS 50 to observe bilingual debate team ELL, Spanish Teacher Sept-Oct Principal Showcase school visit to MS 50 to observe debate and discussion based classrooms History, ELA teachers Sept-Oct Principal Implementation of agile minds practices (Algebra for All) in all three grades of Math Classes to increase discourse and collaborative problem solving Math Dept Sept-Oct AP Implementation of agile minds practices into grade 6 advisory to build foundation for vertical work. Grade 6 Team Sept-Oct Principal, Grade 6 Teacher Team Portfolio rigor assessment, and alignment work. Targeted academic Intervention for students in need of recovery. Teacher Teams Oct, Jan, March, May Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders Theater partnership building capacity for students to write and present ideas with confidence in a formal presentation setting. Includes teaching artist classroom instruction and Staff PD. Students in ELA Class, ELA Teachers Oct-Dec Principal, ELA Teachers PD, planning and preparation work for student academic work presentations In December Teacher Teams Nov-Dec Teacher coaching around student discourse ELA, History, Math Ongoing Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders Principal, AP, MSQI coach, A4A coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  PD sessions to deepen discussion protocol techniques in debate and Socratic Seminar Teacher Teams Reflection work to determine success to build upon and areas for growth teacher teams Dec-April May-June Principal, AP, instructional coach Principal, AP, Instructional coaches, Grade Team Leaders, SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September families will be invited to curriculum night and given the instructional focus, syllabi, and anticipated calendar for the year. Families will be invited to three rounds of student-led conferences where students will present their work from the viewpoint of strengths and areas to grow. This activity will specifically focus on the goal of portfolio task quality and growth and allow families to monitor progress alongside of the teachers and their students. Families will have access to the Jupitergrades online grading platform to further help monitor progress in real time. Each Tuesday, families will have the opportunity to meet with the teacher teams to discuss strengths and strategize how to support students’ growth in their portfolio work. In November and December (depending on the grade), families will be invited to watch presentations of the students work as part of the Strike Anywhere/Irondale Theater partnership. This partnership will also offer parent workshops to engage families in their own direct experience of the type of work in which the students will engage. In December/January and again in May/June, families will be invited to subject specific work celebrations of students’ best work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will maximize contractual time to use the established PD time to support this initiative. Teacher schedules have been modified to allow for grade team and departmental meetings to support the planning and preparation of this work. The schedule and ICT partnerships will be used flexibly to allow for targeted support and flexible grouping to ensure progress. Shortened teacher programs that allots for collaborative planning and team meeting time School-based instructional coaches. The school will be utilizing the showcase school visits as a resource for training that is not a cost to the school. Focus school money and other improvement money will be utilized to fund the purchase of book study books and fund instructional coaches. The school will also use this funding stream for per session to support the debate work, and training of teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  MSQI Partnership—which includes on site instructional coaches, materials (Word Generation) and professional development resources specifically for debate. The school has been awarded an Arts and ELLs grant through the office of Arts NYC DOE that will be used to fund the Strike Anywhere/Irondale Theater partnership work. The school is part of the Algebra for All program which provided training in agile minds and provides the student resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher Teams will formally assess portfolio progress 4 times a year in October, January, March, and May to ensure we are on track to meeting our goal. Students will share their progress with parents during the scheduled student-led conferences. By January, our expectation is that 50% of students will show progress. The school will utilize the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) testing as another measure of progress around student reading—specifically looking for a minimum of 3 points of growth by year’s end. The school will utilize the scheduled interim assessments as another measure of progress monitoring during the year. Learning walks will be conducted during the Fall to provide teams the opportunity to align, assess, and norm practices around discussion and discourse. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. State standards aligned portfolio performance Tasks. Interim assessments. DRP. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year a new grading policy was implemented. This focused on building awareness to the quality of student work rather than just the completion of it. Students and families were engaged to deepen understanding of this concept. Portfolio work was leveraged to demonstrate student strengths and areas for growth. Habits of Work and Learning were also implemented as part of the grade to build academic confidence and routinize ways of learning and engagement in the learning process rather than merely focusing on the end task alone. Students became more aware of how to improve. Across the school the teachers used the language of “Ready to Rise” to help students gauge where they were with regard to grade level readiness. We feel confident in this work because Included in the results of the 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey was that “90% of students said they knew what they needed to do to get a good grade.” (Q2b) Included in the results of the 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey was that “90% of students want to become better thinkers not just memorize” (Q5E). However, only 36% of teachers said that “students build on each other’s ideas during class.” (Q19A). Based on observation of classrooms and conversations with teachers and staff, it is evident that routines 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  and protocols for building student discourse and discussion were not being consistently implemented across the school. In observing our disciplinary data, 90% of all guidance and disciplinary referrals were due to breakdowns in communication and students not being able to productively communicate ideas and feelings with either peers and/or staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2015 100% of teachers will be trained in discussion techniques resulting in a 20% increase on the School Survey teacher question Q19a “Students build on each other's ideas during class” as measured by the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) See action plan for section 5a (pages 18-19) for training, program supports, and coaching various various various Grade Team leader training in restorative practices Whole school PD with Ramapo for Child to develop classroom systems, routines, procedures to set up classrooms for productive discourse. Targeted coaching by Ramapo for Children to improve classrooms designated for growth in establishing an environment where discourse protocols will succeed Grade Team Leaders July 2018 Principal Teachers, Sept Principal Paras Targeted Teachers Sept-Feb Principal Implementation of College Access for All curriculum in grade 7 advisory to expand students’ academic etiquette and help develop a mindset driven toward rigorous academics Grade 7 Team Sept-June Principal, Grade 7 Team Leader, College Access for All Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As part of the College Access for All partnership, family engagement workshops will be conducted to build families’ capacity for supporting academic mindsets in their children. In September families will be invited to curriculum night and given the instructional focus, syllabi, and anticipated calendar for the year. Families will be invited to three rounds of student-led conferences where students will present their work from the viewpoint of strengths and areas to grow. This activity will specifically focus on the goal of portfolio task quality and growth and allow families to monitor progress alongside of the teachers and their students. Families will have access to the Jupitergrades online grading platform to further help monitor progress in real time. Each Tuesday, families will have the opportunity to meet with the teacher teams to discuss strengths and strategize how to support students’ growth in their portfolio work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  In November and December (depending on the grade), families will be invited to watch presentations of the students work as part of the Strike Anywhere/Irondale Theater partnership. This partnership will also offer parent workshops to engage families in their own direct experience of the type of work in which the students will engage. In December/January and again in May/June, families will be invited to subject specific work celebrations of students’ best work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SEL funding has been awarded to the school to help fund the work with Ramapo for Children. A partnership with College Access for All will assist with building academic etiquette in grade 7. We will maximize contractual time to use the established PD time to support this initiative. Teacher schedules have been modified to allow for grade team and departmental meetings to support the planning and preparation of this work. The schedule and ICT partnerships will be used flexibly to allow for targeted support and flexible grouping to ensure progress. Shortened teacher programs that allots for collaborative planning and team meeting time School-based instructional coaches. The school will be utilizing the showcase school visits as a resource for training that is not a cost to the school. Focus school money and other improvement money will be utilized to fund the purchase of book study books and fund instructional coaches. The school will also use this funding stream for per session to support the debate work, and training of teachers. MSQI Partnership—which includes on site instructional coaches, materials (Word Generation) and professional development resources specifically for debate. The school has been awarded an Arts and ELLs grant through the office of Arts NYC DOE that will be used to fund the Strike Anywhere/Irondale Theater partnership work. The school is part of the Algebra for All program which provided training in agile minds and provides the student resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  The school will use the Advance rating system rating of effective and/or highly effective in component 3d—Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques—as an indicator of progress with 70% of teachers evidencing a rating of effective/highly effective in 3d by January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating system—specifically component 3d. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 86% of teachers say they design instructional programs together (Q8a) and 100% of teachers say that they talk to one another about instruction (Q8d). The school schedule has been leveraged to ensure that teams have time built in to collaborate across grade teams and within content departments, as well as having time to plan within ICT pairings. We know that students learn best when they are fully engaged in student-led, inquiry-based learning that is supported by collaboration and discourse daily in the classroom. We know that the most engaging classrooms are led by deeply invested, excited, creative teachers. According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey: only 62% of teachers said they had influence over creation of instructional materials. (Q12d); only 67% of teachers said the principal communicated a clear vision for the school. (Q11b); and as a result only 45% of teachers said they were eager to try new ideas. (Q1d). As identified in the previous goal, discussion techniques were not routinely executed throughout the school in the 2017-2018 school year. Student capacity to develop thinking as a result of classroom discourse was not leveraged. This may be a result of teachers feeling unclear about the vision and/or feeling they do not have agency to be creative. In order to address this feeling within the teaching staff and to promote a clear, coherent vision, this goal is aligned to further deepen the work in building discussion throughout the school. By engaging teachers in collaborative reflection 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  and planning around discussion techniques, providing strategic time for teachers to do the work, and showcasing and celebrating teacher-created practices, we hope to create deeper buy-in in the school by teachers, and therefore jumpstarting creativity and ownership for using discussion to engage students in rigorous thinking within the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100% of teachers will collaboratively analyze and revise assignments and assessments to increase cognitive complexity and opportunity for discourse so that by June 2019 70% of students show progress as measured by Degrees of Reading Power assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) See action plan for section 5a (pages 18-19) for training, program supports, and coaching various various various Individual conferences with teachers around goals and needed support to create a culture of discourse in classrooms. Align coaching and PD to provide differentiated support based on need. all teachers Sept, Jan, May/June Principal Learning walks targeted by grade to assess discourse readiness and a plan to align practice for consistency. Grade Teams Sept-Oct Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders, SLT Progress monitoring learning walks Grade Teams Nov-March Principal, AP, Grade Identified planning time in grade teams to conduct lesson reviews to support aligned practice/consistency in discussion protocol implementation and routinization Routinize lesson assessment protocols and looking at student work protocols as a means for teacher reflection and collaboration to improve questioning and discussion rigor. Block time into grade team schedule. Identify emerging best practices by grade to highlight and create targeted intervisitation schedule Teacher-led showcases of best practices during Monday Pd Targeted Teachers Teachers Grade Teams Sept-Oct Grade Teams Oct to launch and then ongoing Oct Team Leaders, SLT Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders Principal, AP, Grade Team Leaders Principal, Grade Team Leaders Nov, Jan, March Principal, AP, Grade Teams Reflection work to determine success to build upon and areas for growth Grade Teams May/June Principal, AP, Grade Teams, SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team, including parents, will participate in progress monitoring learning walks, and participate in reflection on strengths from which to build and areas to grow. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT hours will be utilized to engage parents in the progress monitoring and to allow the SLT time to reflect and recommend. We will maximize contractual time to use the established PD time to support this initiative. Teacher schedules have been modified to allow for grade team and departmental meetings to support the planning and preparation of this work and provide time for intervisitation. Where necessary, the per diem budget will be used to cover teachers so that they can engage in this work during the day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The DRP midyear assessment will act as monitoring for the goal so that by January 2019, the DRP midyear administration will demonstrate progress in 60% of students. The school will use the Advance rating system rating of effective and/or highly effective in component 3d—Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques—as an indicator of progress with 70% of teachers evidencing a rating of effective/highly effective in 3d by January 2019. Progress monitoring learning walks will be conducted by teams with the goal that by January 2019, 60% of classrooms will be using discussion as part of lessons daily and demonstrate routines around student discourse consistent within the grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP data, Advance rating system 3d, Learning Walk data capture Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 91% of teachers say the principal sets high expectations for student learning (Q11d), 95% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress (Q11f), and 95% of teachers say that the principal knows what is going on in their classrooms. However, according to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey: only 62% of teachers said they had influence over creation of instructional materials. (Q12d); only 67% of teachers said the principal communicated a clear vision for the school. (Q11b); and as a result only 45% of teachers said they were eager to try new ideas. (Q1d). As identified in the previous goal, discussion techniques were not routinely executed throughout the school in the 2017-2018 school year. Student capacity to develop thinking as a result of classroom discourse was not leveraged. This may be a result of teachers feeling unclear about the vision and/or feeling they do not have agency to be creative. In order to address this feeling within the teaching staff and to promote a clear, coherent vision, this goal is aligned to further deepen the work in building discussion throughout the school. By engaging teachers in collaborative reflection 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  and planning around discussion techniques, providing strategic time for teachers to do the work, and showcasing and celebrating teacher-created practices, we hope to create deeper buy-in in the school by teachers, and therefore jumpstarting creativity and ownership for using discussion to engage students in rigorous thinking within the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Engaging 100% of teachers in the development of instructional materials and consistent practices across the grade to promote student discourse in classrooms as aligned to the cohesive school vision, so that there will be a 10% increase in teacher influence over the creation of instructional materials(Q12d) as measured by the School Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). See action plan for section 5C (pages 28-29) Individual conferences with teachers around goals and needed support to create a culture of discourse in classrooms with a specific lens of what teachers feel they can influence and where teachers feel stymied by the principal. Create transparency around principal decision-making to empower teachers to take more initiative. Align coaching and PD to provide differentiated support based on need. Deliver clear, specific, and transparent school vision for the year both verbally and in writing and conduct a Q&A session with the staff as a whole. Develop capacity of distributive leadership to support principal and school vision through team meetings while simultaneously encouraging team input and creativity. Utilize weekly meetings to unpack teacher feedback and make adjustments based on need. Identify teacher developed practices and/or ideas to showcase and celebrate as part of the weekly newsletter and monthly staff celebrations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement various various various All Teachers Sept, Jan, May/June Principal Teams, SLT Sept Principal Grade Teams, AP Sept-Nov Principal All Staff Sept-June Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In December/January and again in May/June, families will be invited to subject specific work celebrations of students’ best work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will maximize contractual time to use the established PD time to support this initiative. Teacher schedules have been modified to allow for grade team and departmental meetings to support the planning and preparation of this work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. December staff survey aligned to School Environment Survey Effective School Leadership will show a 5% increase in positive response regarding teacher influence. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Learning Environment Survey 94% of Families say that school staff regularly communicates with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) and 97% of families say that teachers work closely with them to help them meet their child’s needs (Q1d). In the 2017-2018 school year the school focused on data-based meetings with families, providing ongoing opportunities to understand where their child was in his/her progress, how he/she learns best, and how the school and family can help support the students to their greatest success. Overall, we saw deeper investment in both the students and their families to meet academic expectations. More students than ever met the cut for the state exams and summer school mandates significantly reduced as the quality and quantity of student portfolio work improved. Lines of communication between the school and families seemed open and productive. However, according to the same Learning Environment Survey, only 44% of families said they had the opportunity to volunteer in the school (Q4a) and only 77% of teachers said that families had the opportunity to visit their child’s class room, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child (Q9a). As a school, we want parents to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  be able to meaningfully engage in their child’s educational experience. We want to provide ample opportunities for parents to volunteer and participate in the daily instructional experience. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to collaborate with families as full partners in the learning and development of their children, we will increase and create consistency in our communication with families, including individual outreach to keep contact information current so that parents are aware of the opportunities that families have to volunteer in the school and participate in classroom activities and events so that by June 2019 there is a 5% increase in the number of parents responding that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school as measured by the School Quality Guide Survey (Q4a). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Incoming grade 6 student orientations will be held prior to the beginning of the year and outline the academic vision of the school and provide a calendar of opportunities that parents may volunteer to support. Grade 6 parents Aug Principal Grade 6 Team Parent Coordinator At the family orientations held for all new and returning students, a menu of volunteering and participation opportunities is created and distributed to parents with a sign up form for the “Just one hour” initiative inviting every family to volunteer for one hour (or more) over the course of the year. Schedule is then created for follow up as year progresses. For those families that do not attend, individual outreach will be conducted. Contact information and schedule for “volunteers” will be provided to teachers to support planning of classroom and school wide events. The SLT will form a committee to analyze barriers in parent communication (ie: incorrect ATS address, phone number, no internet access, etc . . .) Committe will outreach to families to update contact data. Committe will set up and host workshops to educate parents on how to use Jupitergrades. School will host family "Internet Hour" every Tuesday at the school during Family Engagement to increase access to grade monitoring. Families will be invited to grade specific celebrations of student work and/or formal student presentations of learning at least once per semester. Families will be invited to chaperon trips, and participate in supporting events at cultural and educational organizations such as museum/theater/cultural institution/places of higher learning (College Tour) visits, book clubs, parent workshops on communication to forward College Access for All. PC will outreach to volunteer list and keep a transparent record of involvement to be shared with the PTA. All Families September Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal Grade Team Leaders Teams September Parent Coordinator October-Jan SLT All Families (Then families identified with communication barriers) Grade Specific September -June Guidance Counselor Grade Team Leaders All Grades Parent Coordinator Administration Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  School will purchase Kinvolve software to better communicate with families whose students have a pattern of absence and use this tool to give daily updates. Families with chronically absent children October-June Attendance Team Dean AP PC will present parent volunteerism participation report to the SLT once a month, to inform decision-making around parent involvement improvement. SLT Sept-June Principal Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. A partnership between the ELA Department and The Irondale theater Ensemble/Strike Anywhere theater will be utilized to create student presentations celebrating learning in ELA. We are partnering with College Access for All around college readiness and college tours. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Family Engagement time, PTA meeting Time, Parent Teacher Conference Time, Parent Involvement Funding Shortened teacher programs that allots for collaborative planning and team meeting time Arts grant funding College Access for All funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly PC report regarding family volunteerism. December survey of parents aligned to the Learning Environment Survey Parent Involvement in School should demonstrate an increase in number of parents surveyed and a 5% increase in parents who indicate they had the opportunity to volunteer. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student that are promotion in doubt due to insufficient portfolio work Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted instruction within the ICT classroom AIS tutoring Students that performed at a level 1 or 2 on previous state exams Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) In class targeted 1:1 or small group As part of ICT classroom during regular class time Tutoring Lunch time, after school and Saturday School tutoring Mathematics Science Students with high absenteeism Student that are promotion in doubt due to insufficient portfolio work Students that performed at a level 1 or 2 on previous state exams Students with high absenteeism Student that are promotion in doubt due to insufficient portfolio work Students with high absenteeism Targeted instruction within the ICT classroom In class targeted 1:1 or small group As part of ICT classroom during regular class time AIS tutoring Algebra for All mentors in grade 6 Targeted instruction within the ICT classroom AIS tutoring Tutoring Lunch time, after school and Saturday School tutoring Targeted instruction during Advisory period In class targeted 1:1 or small group As part of ICT classroom during regular class time Tutoring Lunch time, after school and Saturday School tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Social Studies Student that are promotion in doubt due to insufficient portfolio work Targeted instruction within the ICT classroom In class targeted 1:1 or small group As part of ICT classroom during regular class time AIS tutoring Students with high absenteeism Tutoring Lunch time, after school and Saturday School tutoring During school day push-in or pull out sessions Push-in to classroom 1:1 or in small group Pull-out session either 1:1 or in small group 1:1 or in small group small group Lunch time sessions Push-in to classroom Pull-out session either 1:1 or in small group small group During school day push-in or pull out sessions During scheduled elective period During scheduled Advisory time At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) School Guidance Counselor and Social Work provide intervention counseling for emotional crises and academic crises Dean leads targeted intervention mentoring for low performing boys with high instances of maladaptive behavior Dean leads academic intervention Advisory for low performing boys with high instances of maladaptive behavior 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 17 students STH will be supported with supplies, materials and clothing. A section of the budget is allotted each year for these items to ensure a child’s housing status is not an impediment to learning. Our parent coordinator works closely with each family to ensure the children have what they need, including food. We provide space in the morning before school for students to do homework and receive breakfast. We provide a comprehensive after school program that includes space and time for homework help. Afterschool, lunch time and Saturday tutoring is available for students who are behind academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Currently 100% of teachers are highly qualified. Fort Greene Prep conducts ongoing talent searches to recruit the teachers who will be the best fit for the needs of our school community. To retain quality teachers we create differentiated professional development plans that allow for individual growth aligned to personal goals with a specific focus on developing leadership capacity among the teaching teams. The schedule is designed to focus teacher practice to one specific content area and one specific grade to maximize their planning time toward focused, effective practice. Teachers are fully involved in the decision making of the school in all aspects: curriculum, culture, resources, and professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). MSQI partnership provides coaching, teacher PD, and planning time. Coaching cycles in all content areas have various targets, which are individualized to each teacher or teaching partnership. Coaches will lead professional development and coaching cycles and Urban Advantage Middle School Science Initiative will continue to work with our Science Department. Paraprofessionals received training as part of the weekly PD sessions. Algebra for All provides coaching and resources to the Math Department. Ramapo for Children Coach teachers around Social Emotional Learning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade teams meet weekly with the administration and participate in the decision making for all adopted materials and assessments. The Measures of Student Learning selection team meets each year to determine decisions for MoSL. School Leadership Teams and Grade Team Leaders work with school leadership to determine global assessments for the year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 189,546.00 16,797 39,187 0 0 0 1,776,938.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x n/a n/a n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) section 5 section 5 section 5 n/a n/a n/a section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K691 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Fort Greene Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact 13K691, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Offer opportunities toward parent workshops and book clubs to increase access to the curriculum and improve communication between students and their families and families and the school. Engage families with celebrations of student work and opportunities to highlight student success. Providing opportunities to help parents expose their children to the learning available throughout the city such as trips to museums, cultural institutions, and places of higher learning (ie: College Tours) to increase College Access for All. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Fort Greene Preparatory Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 691 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Paula Lettiere Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tina Giambastiani Teacher/Subject Area Rose Amorosa/ history Teacher/Subject Area Keith Burns/ELA Related-Service Provider Debra Phillips Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Melanie Gardner Coach Kane Summerhayes School Counselor Shellae Washington Parent Michelle Yarde Parent Coordinator Angelique Wharton Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 208 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All incoming students, including ELLs, complete benchmark literacy and math assessments during the first weeks of instruction. This data is supplemental to ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT assessment results from the prior spring administration, and forms a current picture of our incoming students. Analysis of these assessment tools forms the basis for classroom assignment, ESL push-in instructional schedules, and in-class instructional grouping. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Incoming students and families receive an entrance packet that includes documents and assessments. Families also participate in an entrance interview. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In the ESL program, success will be gauged by progress on state assessments and student performance, and achievement of AMAOs, as follows: 1) annual increases in the number or percentage of LEP/ELLs making progress in learning English (increasing at least 43 total scaled score points, or increasing a proficiency level, on each annual NYSESLAT administration); 2) annual increases in the number or percentage of LEP/ELLs attaining English language proficiency; and 3) adequate yearly progress (AYP) for LEP/ELL subgroup in meeting grade-level academic achievement standards in English Language Arts (ELA) and mathematics. 4.) Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) given in the Fall, Winter and Spring. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers participate in at least four cycles of Data-Driven instruction in which assessments are given and analyzed. Based on their findings, instructional strategies and group work are restructured to address individual student needs and focus teachers efforts towards improving language, progress and proficiency. This is monitored through the submission and review of teacher action plans. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to inform teachers of student strengths and areas of need so that they can provide targeted instruction. (See above). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT data reveal that the ELLs at FGPA range from new arrivals with no English language acquisition to advanced ELLs who have been in the NYC school system for their entire educational career and need support in literacy and academic language. The data highlight the need for intensive, needs-based instructional strategies to facilitate proficiency attainment, while addressing additional needs of ELLs receiving special education and resource services. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on our findings, the ENL teacher collaborates with our programmer to develop individualized schedules to address the needs of students classified as needing ELL services. This includes a determination of the students that receive push-in or pull-out academic intervention services. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our integrated ENL program groups students in heterogenous groups that travel together throughout the day. ESL services are provided in a push-in model as well as stand alone instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive ESL instruction according to their proficiency levels-- Beginner / Entering, Low Intermediate / Emerging Intermediate / Transitioning, Advanced Expanding, Proficient / Commanding**. The entering get 540 minutes, and emerging students get 360 minutes, and transitioning and expanding get 180 minutes. Commanding students have 90 minutes. We currently offer a combination of ESL push-in and stand alone instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas of math, science, ELA, and history include standard, varied, grade-level instruction for students in the ESL program. All content courses are provided by instructors certified in their area, using native language where possible to make content comprehensible, and ESL scaffolding strategies to enhance language development. The ESL teacher plans collaboratively with grade teams twice a week for 45 minutes and supports all content areas with differentiation. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newcomer ELLs take the Spanish Lab-R, the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners and the math baseline in Spanish. They also take the periodic exam in their native language as well. They also receive State exams in their native language when appropriate. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a) SIFE Students: Teachers provide additional instruction support and analyze data to target areas of weakness. Lessons are scaffolded to activate prior knowledge of the students and allow access to the content. In groups of 5 or less SIFE students are provided with targeted reading development, and basic math skill building for 100 minutes a week, in addition to language services. 5b) Newcomers, when their home language is Spanish, receive native language instruction through the ESL program, use and have access to native language materials in all classes, and receive native language support from Spanish-speaking teachers and staff. We have the capacity to provide additional pull-out intensive instruction and structured ESL instruction through computer technology 4 periods a day to new arrivals whose home language is not Spanish. 5c) Developing ELLs: Administrators and teachers analyze available and current test data (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, period content assessments) to determine instructional areas of greatest need and target instruction accordingly to promote language acquisition in all four domains. In-class instructional grouping allows targeted intervention to promote progress and challenge. 5d) Long-term ELLs: Administrators and teachers will use all available and current test data (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, periodic content assessments) to determine instructional areas of greatest need and target instruction accordingly to promote 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  language acquisition in all four domains, with an emphasis on academic language building and application. A heavy instructional focus is put on literacy in all content areas, and students attend tutoring sessions for additional support. 5e) Former ELLs: These students continue to receive support and modifications that they received as ELLs even after passing the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Multiple needs students receive ESL instruction as specified in their IEPs, in addition to mandated services in self-contained or collaborative team teaching settings. ESL instructors work with certified special educators and therapists to build language in accordance with the students’ other instructional and learning needs, and with mandated accommodations for individual students. Scaffolding and visual graphic organizers are used in every class to support language acquisition. Students are organized into flexible groups so that they may work with their peers to support learning. Bilingual dictionaries and online programs are used to assist learning in the regular classroom. In Language Arts and Mathematics, students have two teachers to support smaller teacher to student ratios and small targeted group learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school is fully inclusive, and all SWD students are serviced in an Integrated Co-Teaching model with a general education and special education teacher in math and ELA. Additionally, the ESL teacher pushes in to these classes, which can reduce the student-to-teacher ratio to 7-10: 1. ELLs also receive support services during the Advisory period, which allows them to attend all major courses in the least restrictive environment and learn amongst their peers. Technology is used to support language development in class through the use of online bilingual dictionaries and language building programs such as BrainPop. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA: FGPA uses differentiated lesson planning and targeted literacy instruction based on the Code X curriculum to build literacy levels. We also partner with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) to collect data on literacy development and use it to target instruction. In addition, ELLs will attend tutoring and Saturday Academy, which will include reading comprehension and writing skills. Computer technology and online literacy programs enhance learning throughout all subject levels. Math: FGPA uses differentiated lesson planning and targeted instruction based on the CMP3 baseline assessment data. ELLs will attend after school tutoring and Saturday Academy for math, which include computation and grade-level concept skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All teachers at FGPA participate in weekly group team meetings, at which individual student needs and instructional strategies are discussed. Teachers will also receive regularly scheduled professional development on differentiation instructional strategies for ELLs and Students with Disabilities during the year and will participate in inquiry teams designed to improve teacher practice and student outcomes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are welcome to participate in all school programs and the after school program, University Settlement. School programs include robotics, track, soccer, drama, step, basketball, and others. There are also clubs including fashion design, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  yearbook, poetry, Student Council, knitting, chess, film, and others. Many ELL students get personal invitations to join these programs from our Community Coordinator, because we know that it is more effective than backpacking fliers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials for ELLs include a range of bilingual Spanish texts and leveled readers in the content areas. Computer literacy programs such as BrainPop ESL are used to boost student learning. Other technology includes the Smartboard, document cameras, and laptops with spell check. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish-speaking ELLs in the ESL program receive support from the ESL instructor who speaks Spanish, and other teachers who also speak Spanish. Currently there are three languages represented in our ELL population, and we have staff members who speak many languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All instruction is linked to and guided by NYS 6th, 7th, and 8th grade Common Core Learning Standards for all subject areas. Instruction is targeted and resources are scaffolded to allow multiple entry points so that all students can access the material. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials for ELLs include a range of bilingual Spanish texts and leveled readers in the content areas. Computer literacy programs such as BrainPop ESL are used to boost student learning. Other technology inlcludes the Smartboard, document cameras, and laptops with spell check. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). FGPA conducts a summer orientation session for all students in September. In this orientation, all students (including new ELLs) and their parents meet teachers, learn about class expectations and requirements, tour the school, and engage in team building activities to build friendships and school culture. A translator is provided to parents who speak a language other than English. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All 6th and 7th grade all students including ELLs, have a Spanish elective, and some students continue in 8th grade. All students receive electives in Art and Technology. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All instructors, including ESL instructors, are participating in a continuous cycle of observation, feedback, and planning that focuses on the creation of tasks that are authentic, engaging, comprehensive and worthwhile. ESL and content teachers attend additional weekly workshops to support their growth in providing standards-based differentiated instruction based on data. In addition, all teachers, including ESL teachers and content teachers, participate in weekly group team meetings to discuss student needs and instructional strategies, analyze lesson plans and inter-visit classrooms across all content areas. Office staff including guidance counselors, parent coordinator, school secretary and other support staff are trained in welcoming all families and how to use the DOE translation services when necessary. Professional development is currently underway for all staff in their content areas as we continue to build curricula that are both rigorous and portfolio-based. Each department meets regularly with coaches, who support their planning and lesson implementation. The ELA department uses the Code X curriculum, and the math department uses CMP3. Both departments attend PD provided by these organizations. The science department works with Urban Advantage, and the Technology department has a partnership with Facebook and Google. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELLs who are transitioning to middle school participate in weekly advisory classes designed to support them through the transition and learn how to create a portfolio of work that demonstrates their understanding. ELLs who will transition to high school meet with the ESL teacher and guidance counselor to decide which high schools to apply to. They also attend parent workshops and trips to aid in the selection process. The guidance counselor attends professional development on the high school process. Our staff will work in inquiry teams throughout the year to develop differentiated, portfolio-based units that meet all students' needs. This work will be ongoing. We also provide professional development that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners through our work with MSQI and literacy development. This includes full days of coaching biweekly throughout the year for 35% of our staff. Because we are also a fully inclusive school, we also provide regular coaching and professional development on best practices for co-teaching strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL students are scheduled into the ESL teacher's advisory group, and this teacher meets with parents 3-4 times per year to facilitate Student-Led Conferences in which students explain their goals and progress towards meeting them in all content areas. Our teachers provide translation services when necessary, and if we cannot, we use the DOE translation services. The ESL teacher will also individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners during Parent Engagement to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The meeting will be conducted with a qualified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  interpreter/translator in the parents’ preferred language. Attendance will be recorded and kept on file in the assistant Principal's office and/or cumulative folders. Parents also have the opportunity to come up during parent engagement time on Tuesdays. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT ACTIVITIES >>>FALL<<< Parent Orientation Jupitergrades online grading parent workshop PTA meetings SLT meetings Thanksgiving Feast Marking Period 1 Awards Ceremony >>>WINTER<<< High School preparedness workshop Holiday Party PTA meetings SLT meetings Valentine's Party Marking Period 2 Awards Ceremony >>>SPRING<<< PTA meetings SLT meetings Parent workshop preparing for Exam time Marking Period 3 Awards Ceremony >>>SUMMER<<< PTA meetings SLT meetings Marking Period 4 Awards Ceremony These activities build community among the parents and help parents become more involved in their student's success. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  2018-19 SCEP-FL 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Paula Lettiere, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K691 School Name: Fort Greene Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Fort Greene Prep analyzes ATS and ARIS data to determine the variety and frequency of languages other than English used at home with the families of our students. In addition, data is culled from the HLIS, Student Emergency Contact cards, surveys conducted at PTA events and school orientation events, as well as interviews conducted with incoming candidates. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Currently there are 6 languages other than English used by families of students: Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Haitian Creole, and Chinese- Mandarin. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents regularly distributed by FGPA that may require translation: annual student handbook, monthlyewsletters, internal school calendar, parent-teacher and student-led conference announcements, after-school program services, in school tutoring services, NYS testing dates, curriculum guides, PTA announcements, and Field trip (off site) information. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have 3-4 student-led conferences, parent-teacher conferences, awards nights, and PTA events. These meetings take place monthly or per marking period. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will also inform parents of translation services at the intial Home Language Survey Interview. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will conduct regular parent outreach by staff during Parent Engagement, and we will administer the DOE school survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 
