2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K698 School Name: SOUTH BROOKLYN COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: LATOYA KITTRELL 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: South Brooklyn Community HS 15K698 School Number (DBN): 15K698 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 173 Conover street, Brooklyn NY 11231 Phone Number: 718-237-8902 Fax: 718-422-1927 School Contact Person: LaToya Kittrell Email Address: lkittrell@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: LaToya Kittrell Marianita Damari Michelle Cattouse SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michelle Cattouse Alexandria Anderson Domingo Rodriguez District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent: Paul Rotondo Superintendent’s Office Address: 198 Forsythstreet, New York, NY 10002 Superintendent’s Email Address: PRotondo@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 646-654-1261 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Field Support Center Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LaToya Kittrell Marianita Damari Michelle Cattouse Alexandria Anderson Domingo Rodriguez Ebony Howard *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? South Brooklyn Community HS is a small transfer high school serving over-age & under-credited students. Our mission is to prepare students for post secondary success. 2018-19 CEP 8  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. South Brooklyn Community High School (SBCHS) is a transfer school designed for young people who, after initial enrollment in 9th grade at a high school, are having difficulty succeeding in traditional high school. SBCHS has a strong partnership with a CBO, Good Shepherd Services and is designed to provide considerable support and services to students to ensure continued attendance in school. The school is committed to common core instructional model with best practices in youth development. We offer an accelerated credit program, students have the opportunity to earn more than 15 credits a year. Additionally, students will engage in post secondary planning to ensure success after graduation. Students will also be exposed to social issues and experiences that will prepare them to be problem solvers that impact their community and the world. We have small class, advanced placement courses and College Now courses in partnership with New York College of technology. Each student has an advocate counselor and attends group sessions. We offer paid internships to students via Learn to Work program. Other special initiatives include: ● College Trips & College Access Institute ● Career based exposure and excursions ● PSAL Teams ● Extracurricular activities based on student interest such as (Cook for Life, Mural painting, Bike Club, Film, and Photography) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Over 85% of our school is over aged and under credited. Additionally, we have between 30 & 40% students with IEPs. We need a social worker onsite as well as instructional specialist and paraprofessionals. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year is in the areas of trust and supportive environment. Our areas of focus for this year will be rigorous instruction and strong family-community ties. 2018-19 CEP 9  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K698 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 201 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 1 2 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 83.1% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.0% 54.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 8% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 45% 26% 6.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 47 46 58.2% 5.0% 32.3% 31.8% 4.5% 4.5% 2 50% 0.8 N/A N/A 45% 23% 27.7% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 10  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In spite of a tremendous amount of work last year around the Danielson rubric, In conducting the staff needs assessment, a great disparity among instructional practices amongst staff, was surfaced. As a result, it is again necessary to focus a great deal of our efforts on the development of a shared understanding of instructional excellence among our staff through implementation of coherent best practices. Classroom observations and work with consultants have revealed that our instructional staff needs to focus on the following areas as it relates to Danielson teaching framework; -Designing coherent instruction (1e); -School-wide understanding and curriculum coherency regarding rigor (3c) -Using questioning and discussion techniques (3b); -Using assessment in instruction (3d). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a demonstrated improvement in teacher effectiveness by developing a shared understanding of instructional excellence through the implementation of coherent practices aligned with Danielson rubric of effective and highly effective teacher practice. This will be achieved through weekly professional learning sessions, frequent cycles of short classroom visits that are normed to the Danielson Rubric and measured through analysis of written observation reports and shifts in instructional practice measurable through the Advance system’s school-wide measure of teacher practice (MOTP) cumulative data set. This will be measured by the Advance system and movement to all effective and highly effective in teacher rating in (1e, 3b, 3c, 3d). 2018-19 CEP 11 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional staff 9/2018-6/2019 Principal & AP Instructional staff 9/2018-6/2019 Teacher Leaders Instructional staff 9/2018-6/2019 Principal & AP Instructional staff 8/2018-6/2019 Principal & AP Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. All teachers will begin the 2018-2019 school year by attending professional learning to review, reflect, and revise agreed upon best practices which will be implemented school-wide. Teachers will work in conjunction with immediate supervisors to formulate goals for the year. These goals will drive differentiated professional plans for each teacher based on needs and wants. Improvements will be measured by teacher movement along the rubric continuum (ineffective, developing, effective and highly effective) as well as teachers demonstrating implementation of next steps as outlined on Observation feedback that will be given to each teacher. 2. Teachers will engage in ongoing professional development with school leaders, coaches, consultants and/or Borough Center support that will focus on the implementation of coherent practices. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations and participate in the Learning Partners Program (LPP) during the 2018-2019 school year. 3. As direct result of observations, teacher needs assessments and the aforementioned teacher penned goals, individual professional development plans for each teacher with delineated steps for progress and movement to the next level within the continuum will be developed for all instructional staff, with a mid-year check-in for progress. 4. School leaders will set up and follow a schedule for teacher observation and feedback using the Teacher Effectiveness Rubric and focusing on the various rubric components. By June of 2019, school leaders will have engaged in cycles of frequent short classroom visits (depending on the Option selected by the teacher) and provide teachers with formative feedback and professional development to support improved practice in identified competencies [1e, 3b, 3c, 3d] (additional competencies may vary from teacher to teacher) of the Danielson framework. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 12  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will review the framework with new parents and guardians during parent orientation. We will review with all parents during Back to school night. Additionally, we will post the framework on our school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use DOE suggested instructional resources which includes the common core aligned curriculum HMH Collections. We will use human resources via: Learning Partners program consultants as well as PD to implement this. We have structured our daily scheduled to allow for common planning time for our teachers according to departments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 is the mid-point. Additional check points are conducted every 6-8 weeks. (October, December, February, April) By February all teachers will demonstrate effective practice in at least two of four area (1e, 3b, 3c, 3d) as evidenced by the Danielson rubric used for observations in the Advance system Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Over the past three years, we experienced a slow climb in our attendance as we move successfully toward growing our enrollment. Attendance has not exceeded 55% in the past three school years eventhough our enrollment numbers have progressed each year. In 2014-2015 our attendance was 52.3 %. In 2015-2016 our attendance was 52.7%. In 2016-2017 our attendance was 53.2%. In 2017-2-18 we experienced a 5% increase with attendance at 58%. We will continue monitoring attendance daily, utilizing an attendance team. The entire staff will engage in attendance improvement protocols. Large scale attendance incentives will be enacted. Students will set attendance goals with which they will be a conference with their counselor to maintain on a regular basis. With the support of the BSFN we will acquire a regular connection with our assigned attendance Teacher. Additionally, we will utilize KINvolved software to communicate with parents and families as partners in improving their student's attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% point increase in whole school attendance rate as measured by the schools Annual Attendance Report. Moving from 58% (2017-2018) to 68% 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will review their previous years attendance and set attendance goals at the beginning of the school year. Students will be oriented around attendance expectations and answer a survey regarding attendance. Attendance goals will be monitored weekly. Peer student attendance ambassadors; Graduation guardians; staff matched with students Student admissions will remove the truancy criteria Whole staff will review attendance data weekly. Attendance will be posted and visually represented through out the school. Incoming and returning students 9/2018-6/2019 Support staff, Principal, AP Incoming and returning students 9/2018-6/2019 Incoming students Incoming and returning students 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Support staff, Principal, AP Support staff, Principal, AP Principal, AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use software system KINvolved to partner with parents and families to improve their student's attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All school staff will participate in attendance initiatives. The schedule provides for common planning time for those working on the attendance committee. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019- February 2019 are mid points, However, attendance will be monitored daily, weekly, every 21 school days as well as monthly and year-to-date for individual students. By January 2019, we will see a minimum of a 5% increase from 58.2% to 63.2% as measured by the ATS report RSAL. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. RSAL attendance reports on ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. N/A Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. N/A 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. N/A Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. N/A Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. N/A Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. N/A 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. N/A Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are performing below high school level or who have failed the ELA Regents are identified by teachers and counselors. Mathematics Students who are performing below high school level or who have failed the Regents are identified by teachers and counselors. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Several levels of assistance are available. Identified students may be scheduled for after school one on one tutoring with a teacher from our school or from a contracted tutoring service. All teachers are available twice weekly in a drop-in format to provide students with individual help. A targeted, very small writing class is scheduled during the school day for students who are in greatest need. All student progress is monitored by staff in monthly conferencing sessions. As above, - One-on-one tutoring - Twice weekly drop-in assistance - Monitoring in monthly Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group or one-to-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school, After school, during lunch or study hall periods Small group or one-to-one tutoring During school, After school, during lunch or study hall periods 2018-19 CEP 23 Small group or one-to-one tutoring During school, After school, during lunch or study hall periods Small group or one-to-one tutoring Small group During the school day Science Social Studies Students who are performing below high school level or who have failed the Regents are identified by teachers Students who are performing below high school level or who have failed the Regents are identified by teachers At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As in our other interventions, there are several levels of counseling intervention for all our students. conferencing sessions As above, - One-on-one tutoring - Twice weekly drop-in assistance - Monitoring in monthly conferencing As above, - One-on-one tutoring - Twice weekly drop-in assistance - Monitoring in monthly conferencing sessions The most basic, and most important, is the relationship of the student and the counselor from our community based organization, Good Shepherd Services. Students meet weekly with their counselors, who monitor attendance, contact parents and provide a critical first line of intervention for our students’ social and emotional needs. In addition, students meet with their Good Shepherd counselors twice a week in group sessions, examining situations common to them all, including post high school planning, overcoming 2018-19 CEP 24  roadblocks they encounter in completing school and academic planning. The next level of counseling is the referral to Good Shepherd Services for individual or family counseling for those youngsters in need of more intensive intervention. For our students with Individual Educational Plans, a Department of Education counselor meets with those mandated for counseling once a week as delineated on their Imp’s. In addition, all of our guidance counselors are involved in the identification and monitoring processes that determine academic scheduling and interventions. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 16 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services as needed through student and family interviews. Students will remain in communication with their advocate counselors who will assist the student in identifying needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 26  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 27  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: ● SBCHS works closely with our BFSC and Central DOE to recruit talented instructional staff. We rely heavily on their recruitment efforts. We use the New Teacher Finder, reach out to our recruitment officer and attend DOE sponsored job fairs to recruit Highly Qualified Teachers. ● In house, we cultivate linkages with colleges, Teach for America, Math for America and Teaching Fellows to attract Highly Qualified Teachers. ● We use word of mouth referrals from trusted sources to reach out to Highly Qualified Teachers who may be interested in working with us. Arts Matter program will allow us to hire a certified Arts Teacher. We strive to cultivate a learning community where instructional excellence, teacher collaboration, and professionalism are the norm. We believe that the best way to attract and retain outstanding teachers is to build a culture of excellence where only hardworking, capable teachers will want to work. Retention ● We believe that retention begins with a fair, supportive work environment where all staff members are held equally to high professional standards, while given the tools and support necessary to hone their skills. ● Teachers teach 4 classes and preps are generally limited to two in order to maintain a manageable workload for teaching staff. ● Ongoing and sustained PD (see below) is provided to each staff member and is differentiated to meet the needs of individual teachers, regardless of years of service. ● Small class sizes keep the monitoring of student progress manageable while cultivating meaningful relationships with students. 2018-19 CEP 28  ● Small school environment fosters a sense of community, where we are all accountable to one another. ● Support regarding attendance outreach and academic advisement is provided to teachers through our collaboration with GSS -the vastly important, yet time-consuming task of parental outreach is a shared responsibility between GSS and DOE staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development ● We work to provide high quality, relevant PD that begins with a comprehensive needs assessment and is differentiated to meet the needs of all teachers. PD is not “one size fits all” and occurs via the following: o Full teaching staff collaboration and sharing of promising practices, examination of student work and utilization of data points to foster reflection and instructional improvement o Departmental collaboration and sharing of promising practices, examination of student work and utilization of data points to foster reflection and instructional improvement 0 Participation in the Learning Partners Program o Collaboration with and workshops hosted by Good Shepherd Services (GSS) o Collaboration with and workshops hosted by our BFSC o Participation in the Learning Partner Program o Transfer School Superintendent lab site PD’s o Participation in workshops and collaborative work groups with fellow ILearn schools o Participation in workshops and collaborative work groups with Connected Foundations. o Work with outside consultants from Eskolta and ReDesign o Work with our BFSC achievement coach o Collaboration with teaching artists from Dance Theatre Etc. (DTE) o Conferences sponsored by professional organizations such as ASCD o PD in Focus, ASCD’s on-line PD resource o Ongoing support and coaching by lead teachers and mentor teachers Ongoing support and coaching by school administrators Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers’ voices are instrumental in any decisions made regarding instruction and assessment at SBCHS. Teachers will work collaboratively within their departmental counterparts to make decisions regarding assessments and data-driven instruction. Teachers engage in ongoing collaboration regarding curricula, assessments and student achievement. These meetings are guided by the AP or the Principal or a combination of these individuals. All departments have daily common-planning time, which makes close and on-going collaboration possible 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 139,337 0 0 0 2018-19 CEP 30  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,843,404 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 31  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. South Brooklyn Community HS in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students South Brooklyn Community HS, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 2018-19 CEP 33  policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 34  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) South Brooklyn Community HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA)Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 36  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 38  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name South Brooklyn Community HS Borough Brooklyn School Number 698 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal LaToya Kittrell Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dylan Turmeque Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent LaShwn Robinson Assistant Principal R. Scott Herbert Coach N/A School Counselor Jonathan Roberts Parent Michelle Cattouse Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 187 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.21% 2018-19 CEP 39  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses the NYSESLAT results and SRI to assess ELLs. The assessments indicates students overall strength and weakness in Phonemic Awareness and reading comprehension. This data helps inform our school's instructional plan by indicating that a significant portion of instructional time should be dedicated to phonemic awareness as well as letter and word recognition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 40  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is determined by scores on the NYSESLAT. The movement a students make from one performance level to another over several years is another indicator of the effectiveness of the ELL program. We are clearly focused on the students' scale score and performance level on the ELA Regents and Math Regents exams. In addition, classroom progress and student's participation is another indicator of the success of the programs for ELL. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of the NYSESLAT indicates that our students need to work on their reading, writing, and listening skills. All students are on an advanced level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in a collaborative fashion where the ESL teacher works together with the general education and other subject area teachers to plan instruction in a differentiating matter to meet the needs of all English Language Learners in the school. The ESL teaher works together with other teachers to differentiate instruction so that all students are able to understand the lesson being taught. The organizational model for instruction is pull out method. Instruction in this class are differentiated and students are group based on their levels, their understanding of the English langage, and skill that is being taught that period. The ESL teacher work closely with the ESL students to make sure that they understand what is being taught in the class. During the pull out sessions, students work on reading, writing, and communicating in English. Focus is also placed on preparing the students for the NYSESLAT and the different assessment that the students will be required to take that school year. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 41  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All staff members in the building are given a schedule that notifies the teachers of all ESL students, their profiency levels, how many hours they are required by the law to be serviced based on their proficiency level, and when they will be serviced. Students labeled as beginners and intermediate receive 360 minutes of instruction per week in pull out method. Advance students receive 180 minutes of instruction in pull out method. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction in this class are differentiated and students are group based on their levels, their understanding of the English langage, and skill that is being taught that period. The ESL teacher work closely with the ESL students to make sure that they understand what is being taught in the class. During the pull out sessions, students work on reading, writing, and communicating in English. Focus is also placed on modifications to allow ELL access to CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Interim assessments are utilized. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Sife students would be assessed to identify weakness and strengths. Individualized meetings with parents to provide them with an individual plan based on the needs of the SIFE student. A complete assessment for these students will be conducted to find out areas of defiency to help provide necessary teaching and learning strategies. At the same time, we would refine and enhance students' prior knowledge and boost confidence. They would be supported with ESL and Guidance Intervention support services provided by the ESL Teacher and the guidance counselor. Literacy support would be provided in the classroom as well as individual tutoring provided by the ESL Teacher in the student’s native language. The English Teacher and the ESL Teacher would also utilize a collaborative team teaching approach to address the needs of these students. In addition, the following plans are also used: Making an individualized student needs assessment Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literay and math component Grade appropriate instructional support materials Differentiation of instruction in all areas Staff will receive professional development by the ESL teacher on strategies that benefit SIFE within the classroom Professional development will also be offered in the new ALLAD assessment to identify SIFE students An analysis of their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessment suggest that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves: An after school program, targeting reading and writing Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. Plan for Special Needs Students Our policy for special needs students includes: Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students' particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. Collaboration between the ESL teacher IEP contact person. Monitoring newcomer and SIFE student for possible special need status. 2018-19 CEP 42  The delivery of AIS services after school. Newcomers When a new student is registered in our school, we provide an informal student orientation and the following resources to facilitate the transition. Newcomers work in pairs with students in the advance language level. Their different cultural backgrounds are considered as assets. Students challenge, support and learn from each other. We give newcomers assessments first, then set individual goals for each student and reach them with ESL methodologies. Achieve 3000 is used to support instruction. Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day Encourage student to participate in the After School activities An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention Programs Home School Communication Long-term ELL Making an individualized student needs assessment Additional focus on Reading/Writing are given to Long-term ELL's. AIS is provided to students Differentiation of instruction in all areas Former ELLs ESL teacher push-in students class to provide extra academic support Students are Encouraged to participate in After School activities Differentiatin of instruction in all areas aste response to questions here: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A certified ESL teacher will provide ESL as required by the student's proficiency level. This will be as a pull out model for the students which will be programmed and scheduled in an alternative setting. We have ELL students who are proficient in the Reading/ Writing and Speaking section of the NYSESLAT. We have other ESL students who are proficient in the Speaking section of the NYSESLAT. The ESL teacher provides 180 minutes a week to the advanced students. The ELA mandated units will be provided by the certified ELA teacher. Our school currently has a special educator with bilingual extension teacher who provides services to students and collaborate with the ELA teachers to ensure students are receiving adequate support and understanding of strategies and skill taught to improve academic progress. Students receive 2-4 periods of ESL with a certified ESL teacher and the ELA mandated units will be given to students . 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year the ESL teacher implemented the use of Achieve 3000 program. Which helps students develop the different modalities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? here are no ELL programs that have discontinue in the school this year. 2018-19 CEP 43  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are given equal access to the different programs that are offered in the school. They are able to participate in everything that is available to any student in their grade level. Students are able to attend the after-school session, if necessary, where they will work on ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and communication. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology plays a big role in our ESL program. The teacher has access to IPADS, computers and SMARTBOARD to support ELL students. Achieve 3000 is a technology based program that used to support students in content and language. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is another program that is used to build students in the different modalities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Native Language of our students ia embraced in the ESL program. Different activities celebrating the students' native languge are also used in the ESL program. Dictionaries and thesauruses in the students' native language and English are provided to assist the students in the class where appropriate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The Common Core Learning State Standards and curricula are used to plan instruction and activities in the class. The different activities are differentiated based on the students' ages, grade, level of proficiency and ability. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology plays a big role in our ESL program. The teacher has access to IPADS, computers and SMARTBOARD to support ELL students. Achieve 3000 is a technology based program that used to support students in content and language. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is another program that is used to build students in the different modalities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our parent workshop series are offered to all parents who wish to hear information about upcoming events and activities that are planned and set up for the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 44  Our ELL teacher receives professional development through the NYTCF And BFSC. Professional development will be provided to every teacher in our school building on a regular basis by the ESL teacher and principal. All of our teachers will be provided with common preparation periods during which the Principal will engage teachers in study group activities and best practices. These workshops are held on a weekly basis on all areas of the curriculum. The Principal, will also provide the teachers with professional development in Literacy and Mathematics. Differentiated Instruction is embedded in all lesson planning and workshops. Lesson planning, thematic instruction and differentiation of instruction are some of the topics on the agenda. This staff development consists of study groups, modeling instruction and outside workshops. Part of the staff development will take place after school hours during the school year. Our teachers also attend professional development activities provided by DOE and by our BFSC. Professional development is offered onsite as well as through BFSC 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A Professional development will be provided by the ESL teacher to Special Education teachers who will receive 10 hours of ELL training and general education teachers will receive the 7.5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. mandate. Some of the topics include basic ELL background, the school ELL intake, initial language learning (phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary and comprehension instructional strategies), academic vocabulary, childhood and adolescent development considerations, technology- based interventions, co-teaching, joint -ESL and classroom teacher goal setting and monitoring, task complexity, levels of questioning, and using data such as NYSESLAT and periodic assessment data to drive ELL instruction. In addition, teachers will attend workshops offered by DOE, and our BFSC. These meetings will inform teachers about the compliance issues, identification of students as well as testing accommodations and strategies for differentiating and supporting ELLs in their classrooms. We hope to have more ELL students come to our school in the next few years and this will be our planning year to prepare a quality program. The school guidance counselor also helps teachers with ELL students. He helps with the transition from highschool school to college and beyond by involving their parents in the process of learning which schools best meet their child’s needs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In our schol parents are viewed as critical stakeholders in our students' academic achievement and as a result considerable effots are made in order to engage them with knowledge about school events, activities and important information as well as strategies to assist their child with homework. Every effort is made to communicate in the parent's native languge. All communication materials that are sent to their homes, is translated into Spanish (the dominant language of our student body). Our goal is to encourage families to be actively involved in the learning community of our school. The principal, staff and outside agencies will provide multiple workshops throughour the year to engage parents in the education of their children. If we have parents of newly enrolled ELL students, they will be provided with two orientation session. These session include the necessary information regarding their choices for the Transitional Bilingual, ESL or Dual Language Programs. These orientation sessions are separated and apart from regarly scheduled parent meetings and are conducted by the staff and the 2018-19 CEP 45  principal. Some topic that are covered: State standards, assessments, school expectations and general program requirements. Parents are invited to attend these workshops during the second week of September and /or June. A plethora of workshops are provided for the parents in English and Spanish. We occasionally invite community based organizations to send in special speakers and offer their services to our parents. We will evaluate parental needs by having parents fill out surveys indicating the type of workshops and/or services they would like us to offer. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In our schol parents are viewed as critical stakeholders in our students' academic achievement and as a result considerable effots are made in order to engage them with knowledge about school events, activities and important information as well as strategies to assist their child with homework. Every effort is made to communicate in the parent's native languge. All communication materials that are sent to their homes, is translated into Spanish (the dominant language of our student body). Our goal is to encourage families to be actively involved in the learning community of our school. The principal, staff and outside agencies will provide multiple workshops throughour the year to engage parents in the education of their children. If we have parents of newly enrolled ELL students, they will be provided with two orientation session. These session include the necessary information regarding their choices for the Transitional Bilingual, ESL or Dual Language Programs. These orientation sessions are separated and apart from regularly scheduled parent meetings and are conducted by the staff and the principal. Some topic that are covered: State standards, assessments, school expectations and general program requirements. Parents are invited to attend these workshops during the second week of September and /or June. A plethora of workshops are provided for the parents in English and Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 46 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, LaToya Kittrell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: South Brooklyn Community HS School DBN: 15K698 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) LaToya Kittrell Title Principal R. Scott Herbert Assistant Principal Ralph Germain Parent Coordinator Dylan Turmeque ENL/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Cattouse Parent Marianita Damari Teacher/Subject Area Johanna Rice Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Jonathan Roberts School Counselor LaShawn Robinson O'Mayra Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brooklyn North Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 9/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 48  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K698 School Name: South Brooklyn Community HS Superintendent: L.Robinson The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language that they can understand, we used background information on our ELL population, observation of actual beginning of the year registration and review of the HLIS for the ELLs in our program. We then tabulated the number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a child's academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enhance the parents' understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. We also provide information on parent communication needs in the Language Allocation Plan for the school. Our staff, specifically advocate counselors or each student, confers with the parents by telephone, and in one to one conferences on their individual communication needs. 2018-19 CEP 49  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language (6) Spanish; (1) Arabic Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Parent Night meeting notices and Letters from school leadership. Parent night notices go out monthly, prior to the meeting date. Letters from school leadership are distributed as necessary. Compliance documents from the Department of Education are distributed as they come in. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences will be as follows: September 30 th , November 19 th & 20 th , March 10 & March 11, May 10. Additionally, we have monthly parent nights on second or third Wednesdays. interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 50  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have the listed documents posted in the required place in the building. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use one-on-one parent meetings as well as parent surveys. 2018-19 CEP 51 
