2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K722 School Name: NEW HEIGHTS MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: ATIVIA SANDUSKY 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information New Heights Middle School 17K722 331700010722 6-8 School Number (DBN): 790 East New York Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203 718-467-4501 718-467-4506 Phone Number: AtiviaSandusky Fax: asandusky@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: AtiviaSandusky Vivienne Cain Cornise Yearwood VivenneCain Marisa Warner N/A Darren Sanchez District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Room 130 , Brooklyn, NY cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 221-4372 Phone Number: 718- 221-4326 Fax: Brooklyn South FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: MauricierDeGovia 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th St., Brooklyn, 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ativia Sandusky Vivienne Cain CorniseYearwood Marisa Warner N/A N/A Wendy Gamble DantaFord Vivienne Cain *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Elected UFT/Teacher Elected UFT/Teacher Elected UFT/Teacher, Chairperson 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Deon Jones Kisha Mullin Eulina Alcide Cornelia Bard N/A N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Elected UFT/Teacher Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Vision of New Heights Middle School New Heights Middle School is dedicated to equipping scholars with the skills necessary for success and leadership in the 21st century. We strive for our scholars to engage in individualized and personalized learning and growth through innovative, unique structures that support their development. Mission of New Heights Middle School Follow your own path. Reach new heights. The scholar experience at New Heights Middle School is driven by individualization and personalization through innovation and technology. Scholars have choice and responsibility in determining their middle school experience. Scholars will become critical thinkers and problem-solvers through practice in differentiated real-world experiences. NHMS seeks academic excellence through a rigorous 21st century curriculum coupled with realistic problem-solving and advisement in a safe, caring environment. Through opportunities to engage in meaningful learning we make active participation in the global community a reality. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. New Heights Middle School is a Community School located in Crown Heights. We have partnered with The Center for Supportive Schools as our lead Community Based Organization. New Heights is focusing on educating the whole child through a STEAM based curriculum. Scholar-Led Conferences Scholars participate in scholar-led conferences at the end of the first and second trimesters. Scholars lead the conferences with their parents/caregivers and advisors to discuss academic and social-emotional development. These conferences have encouraged scholars to take personal responsibility for their academic performance and engaged scholars in the process of self-evaluation. Instructional Technology An effective entry point identified by teachers is the use of instructional technology geared to increase scholar engagement and build 21st century learning skills. Each classroom is equipped with SMART board technology that encompasses the Universal for Design Learning (UDL) principles that cater to scholars' needs. Curriculum and School Culture Enrichment Field Experiences and Residencies enrich the curriculum and prepare our scholars for opportunities to become critical thinkers and problem solvers. These experiences and partnerships include: Christodora Program/Camp Manice, BAM Shakespeare residency, Bronx Zoo, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, NY Historical Society Enrichment Program, AMNH, 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  MOMA, MET, National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, Queens Botanical Garden, Sony Wonder Lab, NY Aquarium, Jewish Children’s Museum, High School Match, Helen Keller Foundation, NYU Dental Van, The Center for Arts Education: Runaway Art, Lincoln Center, Medgar Evers among others. Through our partnership with Play Study Win , we offer an array of after-school programs that reflect the interests of the scholars such as a basketball mentoring program, Robotics, Art Club, Step Team, Robotics Club, and Journalism Club. Furthermore, we provide additional scholar programming such as Tech Team, Enrichment for ELLs, National Junior Honor Society, and Junior Broadway (musical theater). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Scholar Populations Approximately thirty percent of our scholars are classified as special education. These scholars fall into a variety of disability classifications including: learning disability, speech and language impairment, emotional disturbance, intellectual disability, other health impairment, and multiple disabilities. Scholars with disabilities require specially designed instruction which requires a large amount of consistency, individualization of academic content, and behavior management strategies. Specially designed instruction is outlined in IDEA and involves adapting the content, methodology, and delivery of instruction and aligns with the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework. Approximately 5.00 percent of our scholars are classified as English Language Learners (ELLs). Prior analysis of the NYSESLAT indicated that our scholars’ strongest areas are in listening and speaking; while we have to integrate additional supports in reading and writing. Based on MoSL analysis, scholar work, and teacher observations, our ELLs struggle with academic vocabulary which impedes them from comprehending questions and tasks as well as grade-level texts. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools Areas of the Most Progress: Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. The area of most progress within the Framework for Great Schools is “Collaborative Teachers.” The 2016-2017 SED Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review (Teacher teams and leadership development) as an area of celebration. The findings included, “Teachers in the school are engaged in structured professional collaborations in teams, using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved school learning. As a result of the work that is happening in teacher teams, the school has structures that support distributive leadership and provides teachers, with a voice and shared decision-making which typically results in improved pedagogy. Through this consistent teacher practice students are achieving and showing progress in acquiring their instructional goals.” Supportive Environment : The school establishes a classroom and school culture for scholar improvement while building a positive culture, where scholars feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Through the use of the Advisory Program whose mission is to provide a “Safe and structured environment that builds meaningful and trusting relationships among scholars, school staff and families, with the goal of encouraging positive 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  academic, social and emotional choices, and developing lifelong learners,” scholars are made to feel secured with knowledge that the adults have their interests and well-being at heart. Key Areas of Focus for this School Year: Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Scholars are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity as they develop critical thinking skills. Upon review of the Advance teacher data, approximately 41% of the times 1e: Designing coherent instruction received a rating of "Developing." Approximately 33% of the instances where 3c: Engaging students in learning was rated, the score was "Developing." New Heights Middle School did not have a Quality Review during the 2017-2018 school year as a result of the SED Integrated Intervention (ITT) Review during the prior school year. The school received the following following feedback during the PPO, Areas of Celebration "I am most pleased of the manner in which you have developed teacher teams across the school through implementation of Data Wise. Members have clear roles/responsibilities and expectations for participation in which everyone’s voice is heard. I reviewed the rolling agenda and observed there is a Learner Centered Problem of Practice which the team grounds in evidence based on review of student work, data, lesson plans, and curriculum. Then, next steps and pre-meeting work is determined which is followed up the following week. As a result of this inquiry based approach, teacher capacity has improved, there is coherence of instructional strategies, and students are making progress as indicated on school-based assessments. Indicator 4.2" Areas of Focus / Next Steps "Continue providing teachers with professional learning opportunities to learn strategies for increasing student engagement through use of conversation starters and use of self/peer assessment tools such as rubrics and checklists. You can use videos from websites such as theteachertoolkit.com or teachingchannel.org to model what this practice looks like for teachers." Based on conversations and observations, we noted that we must continue to strengthen scholar ownership of their learning and discussions to ensure all scholars have more opportunities to demonstrate their understanding. Teachers have started to incorporate various instructional strategies such as Socratic seminars and the use of accountable talk to provide solid arguments and respond to peers in classroom conversations. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Need: There is a need for continued increased parental involvement. As such, we have established an open door policy where families are encouraged to visit our school and classrooms. Moreover, we have implemented a number of initiatives to keep families informed. On a weekly basis, scholars receive weekly newsletters and progress reports to 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  keep families informed of school-wide events and their individual child’s academic grades. We also utilized Blackboard Connect and bi-weekly family e-mail blasts to share important information. Over the course of the year, we offered parent workshops through our Learning Learners and Dancing Classrooms partnerships. Additionally, we hosted monthly parent breakfasts with topics such as our online grade book (Jupiter Ed) and structure of Scholar-Led Conferences. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K722 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 234 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 24 22 10 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 25 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 82.5% % Reduced Lunch 6.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 10.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 4% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 33 34 92.1% 3.0% 30.8% 83.8% 0.4% 1.3% 2 19% 5.5 15.3% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the school’s instructional program, 2016-2017 Integrated Intervention Review results, 2017-18 Advance evaluation data, 2017-2018 District 17 feedback (PPO) and the teacher teams facilitation as well as their meeting minutes were reviewed. Strengths: As captured in Quality Review indicator 4.2, "Teachers in the school are engaged in structured professional collaborations in teams, using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on school learning." The Quality Review found the following evidence to support a "Proficient" rating for indicator 4.2. 1. Each grade has a lead teacher that is also a member of the school's instructional team and plays a major role in the schools' decision making in regards to teaching and learning. For example, lead teachers along with the teacher team developed a Rigor Analysis Chart to ensure all tasks are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  2. The teacher teams meet regularly to review student work, shared instructional strategies, adjust curricula and lesson plans to ensure all students make progress. During the teacher team meeting, members were observed engaging in the Looking at Student Work Protocol to adjust a math lesson. Additionally, teacher team members expanded a two day math lesson on distributive property to three days and discussed several instructional strategies for re-teaching the lesson as a result of analysis of student work which indicated many students did not understand the lesson. 3. Teacher voice is a vital part of the decision making process. Teachers articulated feeling valued, and gave a few examples of key decisions they were part of, such as changes to the weekly student intervention schedule, participation in horizontal and vertical inter-visitations, and creation of various instructional strategies. Needs: The 2017-2018 PPO feedback revealed the following, "While instruction has certainly improved, continue to ensure teachers are provided with professional learning opportunities with a focus on scaffolds, increasing student engagement through conversation starters/prompts which will result in a high level of student participation and thinking. (QR Indicator 1.2)" As captured in the "Implementation Rubric: Data-Driven Instruction & Assessment", each of the grade level teams met to discuss their progress in terms of the use of inquiry for data-driven instruction and assessments. Even though teacher teams met to discuss student performance data and review student work, there was a need to refine our practices to include a more comprehensive inquiry cycle. Based on the rubric ratings, the average score for user-friendly data reports include: item-level analysis, standards-level analysis and bottom line result was 2 out of 4. The teacher-owned analysis facilitated by teacher leaders was a 2.6. The transition from beyond what scholars got wrong to answers why they got it wrong was rated with an average score of 2.3. The school and district leaders also reviewed teacher team meetings to gauge the facilitation and focused topics of the meetings. It was noted that there was a need to further norm the meetings. Additionally it was noted that components of an inquiry process occurred but the whole cycle was not completed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ELA and Math teachers teams will participate in 6-6 week cycles of data-based professional development with a focus on lesson planning, differentiated instruction, questioning and discussing techniques and assessment to improve rigorous instruction as measured by effective/highly effective ratings for Domain 1E, 3B, 3C and 3D of the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders, along with the instructional team, will review research-based inquiry cycles to identify a cycle, including analyzing performance data of low performing scholars, scholars with disabilities and English language learners, that will be implemented school wide. School and teacher leaders will create a teacher team lesson plan study committee. ELA and Math teachers will collaborate with each other to analyze and provide feedback on lesson plans. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Team Leaders and School Leaders All teachers Sept 2018- May 2019 All teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teacher Team Leaders and School Leaders Once a month, teacher team leaders will participate in a Teacher Leadership Series with a focus on teacher teams and the inquiry cycle embedded in the meetings. All ELA and Math teachers will participate in a 6-week Professional Cycle of Learning (with a focus on inquiry) differentiated by content and grade. This information will also help to inform discussions with families. All teachers Sept. 2018- School Leaders June 2019 ELA and Social Studies teachers ongoing August 2018 to June 2019 School Leaders, ELA Department Leader, Social Studies Department Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. New Heights Middle School will provide monthly family workshops that will inform families the expectations of CCLS in ELA and Math. Families will have the opportunity to track their scholars' academic progress through Jupiter Grades and meet with teachers to discuss child's grades monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Content and grade level teacher leaders to facilitate the teacher team meetings Scheduled adjustments to have been made to accommodate common planning time within the content-specific departments 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Scheduled time during Monday's professional development and Tuesday's inquiry time to meet in grade level teams Instructional Resources: Curriculum Resources: Expeditionary Learning, Program, Big Ideas, National Teaching Network, Passport to Social Studies Program, MSQI Per Session has been allotted for the Teacher Leadership Series, unit planning, and engagement in the inquiry cycle process Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor teacher teams progress, school leaders will attend meetings and provide immediate feedback. At the beginning of each week, school leaders will read the teacher team meetings minutes to provide written feedback via Google docs. Along with teacher leaders, school leaders will review self-assessment ratings of the school-created rubric as well as engage in a protocol to assess the facilitation and team outcomes derived from the teacher team meetings. School leaders will meet monthly to analyze benchmark assessments, progress reports and student report cards to monitor their academic progress. As of February 2019, school leaders will review the work products from the teacher team meetings to identify trends. Based on the findings, school leaders will tailor the support during teacher team meetings as well as provide differentiated support to the teacher team leaders. Mid-point benchmark- School leaders have attended teacher team meetings and provided feedback on next steps based on the results of the three school-wide interim assessments and formative assessments used to track students' progress. During the teacher team meetings, teachers collaboratively review student work products and identify specific student needs based on the trends and patterns. These areas are addressed during intervention three times a week and small group instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, all ELA and Math teachers ADVANCE data will be evaluated in Domains 1E, 3B, 3C and 3D for effective and highly effective ratings at least 50% of staff members. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a school in its fourth year of existence, it is important for us to continue to establish norms around habits and behaviors as a new class of sixth graders joins our rising seventh and eighth graders. Our new students are coming from different elementary and middle schools within the district, out of the district, and out-of-state schools. Therefore, students’ perception and expectations on school behavior and habits have greatly varied as evidenced by scholar interactions. Furthermore, we consistently enroll students throughout the school year due to transfers from relocating, shelter moves, and charter schools transfers. As evidenced by last year’s survey results, there is a need for an increased sense of respect within the school community. Strengths: ● According to the New York City School Survey, eighty-seven percent of scholars feel that their school offers enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school (City Average: 78%; District Average: 77%). ● According to the New York City School Survey, ninety-six percent of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received (City Average: 94%; District Average: 77%). 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  ● As captured in the 2016-2017 SED Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review , “The school has various methods to communicate clear expectations for teachers and scholars.” Needs: There is a need to consistently reference and reinforce expectations that are positive especially that we added a grade each year. In addition, in light of the above data, there is a need for safety and respect amongst our scholars. ● According to the New York City School Survey, seventy percent of scholars feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria (City Average: 77%; District Average: 69%). ● According to the New York City School Survey, fifty-one percent of scholars say that most students at the school treat each other with respect (City Average: 57%; District Average: 50%). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, NHMS will expand initiatives (PBIS, CRE, Mentoring, and Leadership) that strengthen school capacity and competencies in Social, Emotional, and Academic Learning and Leadership (SEALL), empowering more resilient and engaged students and adults, as well as culturally-responsive school communities, as reflected on and implied by a decrease in student suspensions, school survey results, and a 5% decrease in chronic absenteeism based on ATS data. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student Leadership-At New Heights students will engage in a leadership education (Peer Group Connections) and mentoring program (Achievement Mentoring). Students will be identified based on behavioral and academic data to support and mitigate challenges they are confronting. Topics will include: Identity, Self-Image, Goal Setting, College and Career Readiness and Decision-making. School Community September 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders, Guidance Counselor, Dean, Teachers, Community School Director Parents Implementation of R.E.S.I.L.I.E.N.C.E-Fostering Resilience and Developing Parent Leadership. TRIAD staff will collaborate and provide Parent and Community Engagement services. Focus areas will include: College and Career Readiness, Identity and Positive Parenting. Continued implementation of the Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) team that meets on a bi-weekly basis. The PBIS team is already comprised of constituents that are across grade levels and content areas, therefore creating a collaborative and trusting environment where staff have input. The team will continue to recruit additional members. Through the work of the three tiers, the needs of the various students are considered. For example, daily behavior trackers are in effect for those students who have BIPs on their IEPs. Through the implementation of PBIS, New Heights Middle School will create a culture of trust where teachers, students, staff and families trust one another. Materials and resources will be shared in order to support staff. Students will also have access to free social-emotional, health, and mental services at the school, in particular Mobile Response Team (MRT), NYU Dental Van, Community School Vision Program, and Play Study Win, Peer Mediation. The New Heights Middle School core values (Citizenship, Respect, Responsibility, Relentless Pursuit, and Optimism) will be incorporated into the instruction and culture of school. A Weekly: September 2018 - June 2019 PBIS Co-Coordinators, Community School Director PBIS Team, Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and Mobile Crisis Intervention Team School Community ongoing September Guidance Counselor and PBIS Team, 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  core values rubric has been collaboratively created to outline specific language regarding school culture. The creation of the Core Values Store (CVS) promotes a positive school culture where scholars earn scholars dollars for behaving according to the core values expectations outlined in the rubric. Weekly “Eagle Meetings” and bi-monthly Core Value Celebrations acknowledge and reward scholars exemplifying the core values. The "Eagle Den" provides students with an additional positive incentive. A school culture monthly calendar captures the events for the school year. Throughout the school year, we will partner with consultants from Triad Consulting to provide support to the teachers and staff on Social Emotional and Academic Learning and Leadership and supports for students. The overarching support will be to implement, refine, and/or revise our structures to ensure a culturally responsive environment for our students and staff. The consultants will meet with the leadership team to reflect and refine the current practice. Furthermore they will facilitate whole-staff professional development and individualized support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director School Community ongoing September 2018 – June 2019 School Leaders, Dean, Guidance Counselor, Grade Level Team Leaders, Community School Director How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. New Heights Middle School will host monthly family workshops in collaboration with TRIAD Consulting to provide families with resources that they can use to support their child at home. The parent coordinator along with the community school director will monitor and make revisions as needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: School Culture Committee will meet on a weekly basis to discuss trends and areas for improvement and look-fors for the upcoming week. PBIS Co-Coordinators will provide professional development on the implementation of the PBIS program. Creation of an Academic and Positive Behavior Institute Learning Leaders will conduct parent workshops TAC-D consultants (grant) Borough Behavior Specialist support (free) 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  TRIAD Consulting Instructional resources: Per Session Funding for Teacher-Based PBIS team Scholar Dollars Parent books for book study Core Values Rubric Per Session/Per Diem: 30 hours of per session have been allotted for PBIS Team who meets once a month for PBIS implementation and planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor student progress, the Dean records and tracks the number of incidents in the OORS system in addition to tracking the Hunger Games points that target positive behavior; the school established a Core Value Celebrations and Advisory Challenges which promote a proactive culture in alignment to our core values. Furthermore, there will be a weekly School Culture Meeting where conversations will be normed around the trends that are evident in OORS in addition to the assessment and evaluation of effective practices, and the feedback from teachers regarding student behaviors and disruptions. Students will complete surveys three times a year to be able to provide their perspective on key components of the school's culture. In collaboration with the PBIS team and School Culture leadership team, we will review data on an ongoing basis to assess effectiveness. As per the Brooklyn South BFSC Behavior Specialist, we will utilize the Benchmark of Quality for School-wide Positive Behavior Support. We will also work with the Director of NYU's Technical Assistance Center on Disproportionality to assess culturally responsiveness through the use of TAC-D School Readiness Exploration Tool. Mid-point benchmark: As per our student suspension data based on the most recent OORS data, our suspensions have decreased by 3%. A decrease in classroom, school based incidents as a result of Town Hall meetings, school activities aligned to our Core Values and PBIS initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  According to our current attendance data, there is a 2% reduction of absenteeism an 8% reduction of lateness. Our weekly Student Success Team meetings, letters to parents and attendance initiatives have contributed to the reduction in absenteeism and lateness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019 will see a 2.5% decrease in student absenteeism and lateness as measured by ATS data. In addition, New Heights Middle School will also review OORS suspension data and NYC School Survey Results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: During the end of the 2017- 2018 school year teachers engaged in a six week cycle professional development series focused on Designing Coherent Instruction. Over time, the teachers began to understand the non-negotiable elements for component 1E Designing Coherent Instruction and revising their lesson plans to ensure the instructional strategies met the needs of all students. According to the School Learning Survey, for the response that relates to how parents feel about how teachers are committed to student success, improving their schools, and continuous professional learning within a culture of respect, 97% felt that their child's teacher appreciates their culture/background. Moreover, 95% believe that their child's teachers can communicate well with parents/guardians from different cultures/backgrounds. According to the School Learning Survey relative to the response on how teachers feel about how the school fosters a commitment to student success, school improvement, and continuous professional learning within a culture of respect, 100% of the teachers believed that teachers design instructional programs together. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Need: The 2017-2018 PPO indicated the following, "Continue providing teachers with professional learning opportunities to learn strategies for increasing student engagement through use of conversation starters and use of self/peer assessment tools such as rubrics and checklists. You can use videos from websites such as theteachertoolkit.com or teachingchannel.org to model what this practice looks like for teachers. Quality Review Indicator 1.2" As indicated in the school's 2017-2018 SED Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review, found that teachers are in the early stages of internalizing and implementing the instructional PD that has been provided. Although most teachers' instructional practices are not leading to high levels of engagement and improved achievement, reviewers saw pockets of effective practice in the school, with some teachers demonstrating skill specific instructional strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in inter-visitation to Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) classrooms, job embedded coaching, professional development, and collaborative inquiry to increase the use of formative assessment by 20%, as measured by the the number of assessments administered in the Mastery Connect platform. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Assistant Principal and three Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) will attend the School Leader and Teacher Leader Assessment Matters Institutes. The Assessment Matters Community is a networked group of schools collaborating towards the common aim of building schools with assessment-informed climates, by leveraging the work of teacher leaders and teacher teams. The Community combines Teaching Matters’ coaching and resources with the expertise of practitioners in participating schools to formulate, test, and document solutions to the thorny problem of using data to drive instructional improvements. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals and 3 Peer Collaborative Teachers Math Institute Dates: 10/10/2018, 11/6/2018, 11/7/2018 Assistant Principal and Peer Collaborative Teachers, Assessment Matters Coach ELA Institute Dates: 10/15/2018, 11/6/2018, 11/7/2018 Assessment Matters School Leader Institutes: September 17, 2018: and December 5, 2018 November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, and May 2019 Specific dates are to be determined. Assistant Principal The Assistant Principal and three Peer Collaborative Teachers with participate in four inter-visitations to Assessment Matters host schools in order to identify the implementation of school-wide best practices around assessment. Select Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  NHMS will implement ongoing targeted professional development opportunities around formative assessment. Professional learning will the All teachers November 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal and UDL Inquiry team Assessment practices will be modeled for teachers in lab classrooms. The lab classroom visits will include observations of the implementation of formative assessment practices reviewed at professional development sessions. The lab classrooms will be visits to the Peer Collaborative Teachers and the visit schedule and debriefs will be facilitated by the Assistant Principal. All teachers ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal and Peer Collaborative Teachers Teachers will use ensure all of the critical attributes are visible in classrooms from component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. All teachers School Leaders ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. New Heights Middle School will collaborative with parents twice a month during Family Engagement on Tuesdays to provide strategies and resources that are aligned to assessment and the CCLS. Administration will monitor parent attendance and improved student outcomes in ELA and Math Mastery Connect and Jupiter Ed data. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: -School Leaders and Peer Collaborative Teachers will be provided with the opportunity to attend Assessment Matters professional learning opportunities including institute sessions. - There will be an additional period of planning time for teacher grade level and department teams incorporated into the schedule to allow for teacher collaboration and planning of assessments. - PD Committee will host professional development workshops on formative assessment. -Peer Collaborative Teachers will meet with the school's Assessment Matters coach each week. Instructional resources: -Professional learning opportunities provided by Assessment Matters. -Professional learning materials (i.e. books from Assessment Matters and ASCD). 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  -Mastery Connect platform and training materials. Per Session/Per Diem: Substitute teachers will provide teacher coverage as needed for those teacher leaders who attend the scheduled professional development workshops throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, New Heights Middle School leaders will review lesson plans on the shared Google Drive to assess progress toward the goal. Progress will also be determined by formal and informal classroom observations to assess implementation of formative assessment and all elements of component Danielson 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. Mid-point benchmarks: Lesson plans have reflected formative assessment and all elements of component Danielson 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction one month after the first round of school-wide visits to the lab classrooms. An additional benchmar will include improved Danielson 3d scores as evidenced in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To monitor progress, ongoing professional development will be offered in the areas of multiple entry points and Universal Design for Learning principles. School leaders will observe teachers and review lesson plans to ensure teachers are properly implementing the principles into lesson plans and are provided with specific feedback. Formal and informal checks will ensure that scholars are provided with the necessary access to the curriculum and that there is evidence of differentiation of instruction in classrooms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N\A N\A X N\A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: During a district visit, evidence of checks for understanding was observed in most of the classrooms. In addition to summative assessments, teachers utilize formative assessments (e.g. entrance tickets, exit tickets, whiteboards, small group instruction, Google docs) to gauge scholar learning. Furthermore teachers utilize Jupiter Grades, a standards-based rubric to monitor and communicate scholar progress. Learning Survey Results Based on the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals, communicates a clear vision for the school; understands how students learn; and carefully tracks student academic progress. Need: Despite the implementation of assessments, observations and discussions have revealed that there is still a need for teachers to refine their abilities to utilize daily checks for understanding, ability to use the assessment data (including 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  standards-based grading), and develop action plans that will improve scholar outcomes and production of meaningful work products. As per the feedback provided by District 17, "Rubrics are loosely aligned with the school’s curricula thus providing limited feedback to students regarding their achievement. The school leader recently put an action plan in place using student data from assessments to provide intervention to students based on skills. " The Principal Performance Review Measures of Leadership Practice Summative Feedback SY 2017 - 2018 provided by Superintendent Ellis indicates a rating of "Proficient" for Quality Review Indicator 4.1: Teacher Feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in oral feedback sessions with Administration (POST OBSERVATION) followed by timely, consistent classroom re-visitation to review implementation, as measured by a 10% increase in teacher ratings to effective/ highly effective in the ADVANCE rating system. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in professional development sessions aligned to the goal of implementing assessments and adjusting instruction. Teachers, along with paraprofessionals, will review formative assessment performance data, utilizing research-based protocols to analyze format/content of assessments, frequency of assessment integration, reflect on teacher impact, and revise lesson plans that are responsive to student needs. The assessment data will also be utilized to create small, guided groups as well as analyze the progress of the scholar subgroups. All teachers will engage in norming and alignment of standards-based grading. Data Specialist will provide professional development to teachers in regards to standards-based grading. Teachers will attend differentiated professional development sessions based on areas of need. School leaders will review Jupiter Grades on a weekly basis aligned to the checklist on a weekly basis. Teachers will receive weekly feedback on the use of standards-based grading. School leaders will visit each teacher’s classroom a minimum of six times over the course of the year, and provide teachers with actionable, timely verbal and/or written feedback aligned with teacher needs and Danielson’s components. School Leaders will meet weekly with the Peer Collaborative Teachers to discuss instructional strategies that will support/improve teacher pedagogy, School Leaders will meet weekly with National Training Network Coach to identify areas of focus in math , and other professional development opportunities to further their own development. In order to ensure that parents are well informed, the School Leadership Team will be informed of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, the teacher evaluation process, and Common Core Learning Standards. Furthermore parents receive weekly (paper version) and 24/7 (online version) progress reports generated from Jupiter Grades, an online grade book, to communicate course averages. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Staff Members ongoing School Leaders September 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers ongoing School Leaders, Teacher Leaders September 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers ongoing School Leaders September 2018 – June 2019 Parents ongoing September 2018 – June 2019 School Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. New Heights Middle School will collaborate with Triad Consulting and facilitate professional development for 6 week cycles providing parents with the expectation from school and leaders and strategies that will engage parents focusing on preparing their child to be college and career ready. Parents will receive a monthly newsletter from the school leader that includes pertinent information. In addition, the school leader will give a "State of the School" address to inform all families the school progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: -Department Leaders - MSQI coach and visits the school once a month to support teacher practices. - The Literacy Support Services consultant. -Teacher Leaders teaching load will increase for direct scholar impact Instructional resources: -Jupiter Grades, online standards-based grading system Per Session/Per Diem: - Substitute teachers are brought in for classroom coverage while teachers attend scheduled professional learning workshops. -Per session funding will be utilized for the differentiated Jupiter Grades professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 5% increase in teacher ratings to effective/ highly effective as measured by the ADVANCE rating system. Mid-point benchmarks: Effective\Highly Effective ratings have increased by 2%. Administrators will continue to review areas in ADVANCE that are not reflecting improvement and align professional development to those areas. Feedback sessions will reflect specificity when speaking about the areas of improvement based on the ADVANCE rating system data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To monitor teacher progress, school leaders will conduct ongoing observations as well as bi-weekly Advance data review to gauge progress. Furthermore school leaders will review Jupiter Grades data on a weekly basis. Teachers will engage in self-reflections on the integration of feedback, especially in the area of integration of checks for understanding for all students. (SWD, ELLs STH) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment SOP(s) Addressed N\A N\A N|A Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the school’s academic response to this element of the Capacity Framework (Strong Family and Community Ties), the School Environment Survey, the Quality Review Report, and school-created family survey results were reviewed. Strengths: According to the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey - high expectations are constantly shared with parents, parent involvement, engagement, has increased and parents feel empowered through several of the activities they have participated in throughout the year. - During parent interviews it was stated that families receive ongoing communication about their child(s) progress, via emails, phone calls, and progress reports through an online system, Jupiter Grades. Ongoing training for the online system is offered for new parents and parents to receive a refresher . We will provide translation services for parents that need it in their home language. ● Eighty-five percent of parents attended our Back to School Evening & Community School Forum May 2018. Scholars led the forum and engaged with the parents about their experience at New Heights Middle School. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  ● According to the New York City School Survey (2017-2018), ninety-six percent of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received. ● According to the New York City School Survey (2017-2018), ninety-four percent of parents agree or strongly agree with the statement “families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they received from their school .” Needs: According to the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, NHMS needs to increase creating a supportive environment for staff and students. The majority of staff and students feel the classroom behavior needs to improve.   Fourty-eight percent of the teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching Fifty-five percent of the students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. Based of the survey, this is a common need for the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2019, New Heights Middle School will increase the number of school events in which families can engage the school community. This will be evidences by increased positive response and feedback on at least 3 parent, in-house surveys. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). New Heights Middle School will continue to use Blackboard Connect (phone messaging system), email distribution, and print copies of Weekly Announcements to advertise upcoming family events. Messages will be sent out in the family’s native language. The New Heights Middle School Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor will reach out to local organizations to find ways to develop meaningful partnerships that benefit the families of its scholars (i.e. financial literacy) . There will be a focus on partnerships that support the families of SWD and ELL populations (i.e. High School Match for SWD). Identify at-risk scholars and reach out to parents of these scholars about partnerships and opportunities that are available. New Heights Middle School will host workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, supporting their child's learning at the middle school level, standards based learning, study skills, and meeting the social emotional needs of middle school scholars. The New Heights Middle School SLT will host a series of events that will help parents meet their children’s social and emotional needs (i.e.Family Math Night, Family Game Night, Multicultural Night parent workshops and Student-Led Conferences. The School Leadership Team will utilize protocols (e.g. Data Driven Dialogue) during the monthly meetings to increase engagement among all members of the School Leadership Tam. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Families All Families ongoing August 2018 June 2019 ongoing August 2018 June 2019 Parent Coordinator and School Leaders Parent Coordinator All Families ongoing October 2018 June 2019 Parent Coordinator and School Leadership Team School Leadership Team members ongoing September 2018 June 2019 School Leaders, SLT Facilitator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New Heights Middle School will collaborate with Center for Supportive Schools, TRIAD Consulting and Play Study Win Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Human resources: - The Parent Coordinator and PA Executive Board will assist with the parent engagement and logistics. - Guidance Counselor will conduct workshops with parents on the high school application process. Iinstructional resources: -Materials and supplies for parent engagement workshops -Online standards-based grading system, Jupiter Grades Consultants: -Approximately $17,550 was allotted for parental involvement -Learning Leaders will provide training during the school day Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School leaders will examine attendance sheets, parent survey results, and School Leadership/Parent Association feedback sources to monitor progress. Mid-point benchmark: By February 2019, a 5% increase in parent workshops and activities will be offered for parents to attended based on the results of the parent interest survey. Administration will meet with the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director to ascertain if increased outreach is required and what follow up must be instituted for increase attendance to all workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure to assess progress are attendance sheets, parent surveys, and protocol outcomes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10% increase in improved student outcomes by providing scholars with small group instruction using i-Ready program offered to them beyond the school hours during ELT hours twice a week. Furthermore, ELT programming increases school-wide learning opportunities in extended day with a focus on improving academic achievement and social-emotional development through data-driven academic groupings and engaging enrichment activities that broaden cultural experiences. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Not Applicable Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The Expanded Learning Time program will be divided into academic and enrichment programming offered to all of our scholars. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  For the academic portion of our ELT programming, scholars will take part in the following: Small Group Tutoring, Book Club (for guided reading), Tech Team, Specialized High School Test Prep Program, NYSESLAT Test Preparation, and iReady online academic instruction. Our classroom teachers will serve as instructors for the academic programs offered. We will tier the academic component of our ELT to ensure that all scholars receive the proper instructional supports based on their academic performance. For the enrichment portion of ELT, we will partner with Play Study Win to provide more comprehensive programming. Scholars will be administered an interest survey two times during the school year. The survey will be created in collaboration with the School Leadership Team and Play Study Win. Based on the selection, scholars will be assigned to an activity that reflects their top choices. To date, some of the activities offered include Basketball, Chess, Soccer, Dance, Art, and Musical Theater. Groupings will be determined by each scholar's individual performance on baseline and interim assessments in English Language Arts and Mathematics. Our ELLs will utilize Achieve 3000, an online platform for differentiated instruction in non-fiction reading and writing. Scholars identified as special education as well as those performing below grade level standards will have access to Achieve 3000, iReady, and/or small group strategic reading/mathematics tutoring. New Heights Middle School will communicate with families through the use of the Blackboard Connect phone system, e-mail correspondence, weekly newsletter, and individual phone calls made by the Parent Coordinator. The ELT program will be outlined as follows: -one and a half hours of extended learning time; -differentiated instruction based on tiered programming and scholar interest; -technology based programming in academic activities; -enrichment activities based on scholar choice through analysis of surveys; -two culminating showcases in December and May/June; -male and female empowerment groups to address social-emotional needs of the scholar population' -Saturday Academy to provide additional academic support to our scholars' -Monthly professional development sessions to address scholars' needs and purposeful planning around the social-emotional development of our scholars; -Monthly correspondence via family newsletter; and 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  -Utilize Blackboard Connect phone system and e-mail blast which serve as communication systems to inform parents of scholars' attendance, school announcements, and upcoming school events. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The key personnel that is responsible for the implementation of the ELT Program are as follows: Extended Learning Time administrators and Play Study Win Director. The evaluation of the effectiveness of the program will be monitored by: -Twice a month building walk-throughs aligned to expectations outlined prior to the start of the program will be conducted -Progress monitoring of scholar attendance -Scholar interests and feedback survey administered three times throughout the school year -Performance on formative and summative assessments -Analysis of instructional reports, scholar work, and Jupiter Grades scholar performance data -Twice a month review of data to asses scholar master of standards -Ongoing professional development sessions for all ELT staff Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The time-line for implementation and completion is from October 2018 to June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. The following resources are needed to implement the ELT program: -allocated funds (e.g. per session) for the teachers and supervisor of the ELT program as well as to compensate for the extended day -instructional materials (e.g. Wilson,Achieve 3000, novels, iReady); -supplies for the enrichment programs 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The effectiveness of our Extended Learning Time program will be monitored using the following benchmarks: -Attendance rate in the Expanded Learning Time program -Progress reports generated through Jupiter Grades -Reduction of incidents occurring in Extended Learning Time program via OORS reporting -Scholar participation and engagement in the showcase performances -Interest surveys to gauge scholar level of satisfaction with program and level of engagement with activities Mid-point benchmark: ELT attendance as of February is 80%. In addition, school leaders will review i-Ready data at the end of February to identify a minimum growth of .3 year academic progress on the i-Ready platform. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The ELT attendance/participation rate as well as i-Ready benchmark data will be used to assess progress in February 2019. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Diagnostic Reading and Writing Assessments Review of teacher-created assessments, summative assessments, and scholar work products Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted ELA Instruction Saturday Academy, afterschool,in-class support Targeted ELA Instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided reading/writing program Small group One-to-one Wilson Program One-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day Saturdays/ Afterschool During the school day During the school day During the school day Saturdays /Afterschool During the school day During the school day Targeted ELA Instruction Mathematics Diagnostic Mathematics Assessment Targeted Mathematics Instruction Small group Independent Reading Small Group Intervention (rotation schedules) Science Saturday Academy, afterschool, in-class support (previewing and re-teaching concepts and skills) Small group One-to-one Previewing and re-teaching concepts and skills Small group One-to-one Review of teacher-created assessments, summative assessments, and scholar work products Review of teacher-created assessments, summative assessments, and scholar work products 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Review of teacher-created assessments, summative assessments, and scholar work products Review of behavior alerts to note trends of social-emotional behaviors of concern Attendance records Previewing and re-teaching concepts and skills Small group One-to-one During the school day During the school day Afterschool During the school day TAC-D program, individual check-ins, advisory support, Guidance support, Peer Mediation Program Guidance and advisory support, attendance outreach, parent meetings with school leaders Small group One-to-one Partners One-to-one Advisory groups (for contest on attendance) Mobile Crisis Intervention: Interborough 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 42 scholars Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor will conduct outreach to the scholars in temporary housing to gauge family needs. Each of the scholars will receive basic school supplies, including instructional supplies and uniforms. The identified scholars will also be targeted for additional social emotional and support services, in particular NYU Dental Van, Play Study Win, Mobile Crisis Team, and Helen Keller Vision Program. In terms of academic support, all identified scholars will be invited to particulate in our afterschool program. Monthly meetings to address concerns and next steps will consist of the support staff, parent coordinator and parents. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  All of the scholars identified as part of the STH population will be provided with free instructional supplies and uniforms. Furthermore the targeted scholars will be mandated to attend Saturday Academy and/or afterschool where they will work on skills aligned to their needs as well as provided with lunch. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In collaboration with the professional development committee, we have devised a professional development plan for teachers and paraprofessionals that was strategically created around our CEP goals, all of which synthesize to increase and support scholar achievement and their meeting or exceeding of the implementation of the CCLS. Each session correlates to a NYC DOE identified Danielson Competency and teachers engage in collaboration and/or self-reflection at all sessions. School leaders and teacher leaders that have demonstrated effective practices facilitate these sessions. Staff who attend exhibit strong pedagogical and instructional practices as well as external professional development sessions are invited to turnkey what they learned at Monday professional development sessions. For each of the sessions facilitated at New Heights Middle School, teachers and paraprofessionals provide feedback on its effectiveness and ideas for future professional development sessions. School leaders participate in professional development sessions to support their own growth. Both school leaders participate in professional development over the summer and throughout the school year. For the major initiatives that are school-wide or department-wide, at least one of the school leaders will participate in the off-site professional development sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL committee elicits the feedback of each of the departments before we make final decisions around MOSL selections. Furthermore department chairs take into consideration teacher feedback on ongoing basis around assessments and its analysis where it is communicated to school leaders. Furthermore each of the departments decide on the types and dates for department-wide assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 4b Section 5B, 4b Section 5C, 4b Section 5D, 4b Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 192,600 x Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 2018-19 SCEP-P 52 16,979 0 0 0 0 2,103,196.00 x x x Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local Section 5E, 4b Section 5A, 4b Section 5B, 4b Section 5C, 4b Section 5D, 4b Section 5E, 4b Section 5A, 4b Section 5B, 4b Section 5C, 4b Section 5D, 4b Section 5E, 4b Section 5A, 4b Section 5B, 4b Section 5C, 4b Section 5D, 4b Section 5D, 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. New Heights Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. New Heights Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g. Achieve 3000, Math XL, Math and ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress (e.g. access to Jump Rope, the online grade book, distribution of weekly progress reports); ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand (e.g. school website, written correspondences, phone outreach) ; and ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. New Heights Middle School’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the New Heights Middle School’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, New Heights Middle School will: actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Family Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Family Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Family Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. New Heights Middle School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Scholar-Led Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing weekly written progress reports to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school calendar or web communication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) New Heights Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● providing technology integration to develop and support 21 st century skills; and ● providing scholars with advisers who support them academically, socially, and emotionally. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting scholar-led conferences each of the first two trimesters during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of scholars participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● posting important information on the school website, utilizing School Connect to call and sending e-mail blasts to families regarding school events; and ● utilizing Jump Rope, an online grading platform, which includes parent/student logons for up-to-date academic progress. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and ● planning activities for parents during the school year (e.g., Open School Week, Art Night, Science Night, Brooklyn Museum Family Night, Game Night). ● Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 30 minutes); ● read the weekly newsletters and review the weekly progress reports; ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the New Heights Middle School’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; and ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Scholar Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● play an active role in my learning; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● behave according to New Height Middle School’s core values (e.g. citizenship, respect, responsibility, relentless pursuit, and optimism); ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; and ● exhibit relentless pursuit in order to take charge of my own learning. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our community school (CS) strategy integrates a holistic approach to improve our students’ learning opportunities at New Heights Middle School. Specifically, we implement strategies to engage our students’ academic outcomes through extended learning time, attendance supports, youth development, family engagement, and health and wellness. During our school program, we work with CBOs and in coordination with the DOE to provide programs like MTI Broadway Jr. Program and CSS’s Peer Group Connection program. During after school hours and ELT, we provide coding, music technology, engineering, performing arts, theatre, and poetry. In addition to this, our rollout of CSS’s Achievement Mentoring and the Student Success Team not only address chronic absenteeism, but our programs also work with students on their academic success. These new strategies help our students manage their stress, so that they can pursue their own academic success with less encumbrance. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, 70% of students in each grade will complete an experiential learning program through programs like Play Study Win & Medgar Evers’ STEP program, and at least 65% of students will demonstrate mastery on program’s post assessment. 2. By June 2019, severely chronic absenteeism will decrease by 2% and chronic absenteeism will decrease by 2% as measured by the average daily attendance rate through the continued implementation of CSS’s Achievement Mentoring, the Student Success Team, and attendance incentives. 3. By June 2019, the number of parents receiving resources and family resource services will increase by 15% through referrals and outreach by CSS’s Community School Director and the school’s Parent Coordinator. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Providing an innovative approach to learning during the regular school program, after school, and ELT, will support our academic goals for students because they are teaching our students to exercise creativity, think critically, and apply problem-solving skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Decreasing the absenteeism rate will support our academic goals for students because students’ learning outcomes will improve as their attendance increases, resulting in students attending school more often to actively engage and receive instruction. ELT is intended to hone in on areas of need for academic improvement from small group instruction, remediation, and enrichment programming, thus clearly correlating the two will help tie the goal closely to the programs being implemented. Increasing the number of parents who utilize our services will support our academic goals for students because if they are helped by providing connection to services like health care, counseling, adult learning opportunities, and Parent/Teacher academic workshops, then in turn, they will be able to help their children reach their potential by bringing them to school, helping with their homework, and provide a space for studying. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Attendance Supports Target Population 60-90% chronically absent students Expanded Learning Time All Students Expanded Learning Time- Play Study Win All Students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CSS’s Achievement Mentoring -- is an evidence-based mentoring program for high-need students; weekly positive behavioral reinforcement mentoring sessions; monthly positive parent outreach. Students are exposed to the following skills: Reading, Writing, By June 2019, 80% of mentors will implement AM with fidelity and 80% of mentees will miss fewer days than the previous school year. By June 2019, 40 students will have participated in theater production. Speaking, Listening, and Communication. Academic Enrichment programs such as coding, music technology, engineering, performing arts, etc. By June 2019, 100% of students will have participated in at least two of ELT enrichment classes. Family Engagement All families Blackboard By June 2019, 100% of families will receive regular communications 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Attendance Supports All 6th graders CSS via text message informing them of (1) their child’s progress and (2) community school opportunities for engagement and leadership Attendance Supports All 6th graders CSS By June 2018, 80% of 6th graders will feel connected to school and supported by their peers. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  The Community School Partnership with New Heights will continue to be a relationship built on collaboration, support and innovation. The Community School Director supports and provides oversight over all attendance support programs at New Heights including, Peer Group Connection, Achievement Mentoring and attendance incentives. All decisions regarding attendance supports are made in collaboration with school administration. In addition to these supports, the Community School Partnership maintains involvement in family engagement, community engagement and youth development. The Collaborative Budget Planning Meeting takes place three times during the academic school year allows all key stakeholders in the Community School Partnership the opportunity to plan and execute initiatives aligned with school-wide goals. These meetings also allows for shared planning, assigned responsibilities, and dedicated time to ensure all goals centered around the Community School strategy are being met on a timely basis. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside PTA Funded X SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 2. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  3. 4. (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The full-time Community School Director (CSD) was hired in partnership with school leadership and the SLT. The CSD is responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy. The CSD is a "community organizer,” facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The CSD drives development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. The CSD tracks the school’s progress against performance goals, reviews school data, supports program evaluation activities, and manages partnerships. The CSD will lead CBO team members in implementing the Community School strategy. The CSD will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include:  Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners  Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs.  Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey at key times throughout the school year to inform continuous improvement.  Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including ongoing partnership evaluation  Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer  programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; and Mentoring.  Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school   Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions on weekly basis, as part of weekly Student Success Team  Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT, CST, and other school stakeholders 2. The New Visions Student Sorter and Attendance Heat Map will continued to be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Until implementation, the CSD will utilize “Data Snapshots” developed 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  through analysis of various ATS reports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed.  Partner programs will collaborate with teachers and others involved in instructional programming and regular points of engagement will be implemented throughout the year to ensure a cohesive instructional approach within and outside of the regular school day. Two examples include: o Through Peer Group Connection (PGC), 8th grade peer leaders will facilitate a “Faculty Outreach” in which the faculty experience for themselves the PGC program. Through this experience, faculty will become more knowledgeable about PGC and become better equipped to bring practices from the program into their classroom. o Through CSS’s Achievement Mentoring, mentors will regularly connect with teachers to learn about how their mentees are performing in class. Through this weekly interaction, teachers will also learn more about the work of mentors and mentees and how they can support this work in their classroom. 3. In partnership with the principal, the CSD will form and subsequently convene monthly meetings of a Community School Team (CST) whose membership will include: members of the School Leadership Team (SLT), other key school staff and/or faculty, key staff from other partner CBOs, parents, and students. Through this meeting, issues will be regularly communicated to and discussed by the group. An annual Community School Forum will engage parents in authentic discussion to learn about the community school strategy and provide feedback on areas of success and areas for improvement. Surveys and focus groups with parents will also be held at key times throughout the school year to inform continuous improvement. The CSD will also work with the Parent Coordinator and identified parent leaders to define and implement strategic initiatives to better engage parents in their child’s education and support the community school. Planned initiatives designed to support authentic parent engagement include:  Parent Resource Room -- an open, welcoming space where families are invited to learn about and take advantage of resources available in the school community.  PGC Family Night -- 6th grade parents are welcomed to an evening event facilitated by student peer leaders designed to help parents learn more about PGC, learn more about their child’s experience transitioning to middle school, and to dialogue with other parents about their own challenges supporting their child’s transition to middle school.  Monthly positive parent outreach -- parents of CSS’s Achievement Mentoring mentees will receive specific positive progress updates from mentors on at least a monthly basis. 4. The principal and/or assistant principal, CSD and other members of the Student Success Team will meet for one period on a weekly basis to review the Attendance data(until New Visions Data Sorter is available), using the meeting agenda protocol recommended by NYCDOE. During this meeting, the team will review attendance trends and specific student cases to identify and implement next steps and interventions. If questions arise about Student Sorter data, the CSD will serve as the school’s liaison to New Visions’ to address questions and build capacity within the school around Student Sorter proficient. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partners include: Interfaith (Health services) 1. 2. Play Study Win - Learning through an Expanded Art Program – Sports enrichment and afterschool programming and youth development 3. Medgar Evers STEP – ELT STEM Program 4. NYU Dental (Health services) 5. Hellen Keller Foundation (Health services) 6. High School Match- support 8th grade families with high school application process CSD focus areas for the 18-19 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) parent engagement and (3) youth development/social and emotional student supports. 2. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, CSD, students, representatives from Play Study Win, and other community partners. A meeting notification will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the CSD recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. 3. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the CST and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the CSD. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  Achievement mentors will need 30 minutes per week per mentee built into their scheduled school day responsibilities.  PGC requires a daily course programmed for selected 8th grade peer leaders and regular outreach sessions for 6th grade students within the regular school day. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  Peer Group Connection (PGC) -- The daily peer leadership course for selected 8th grade peer leaders will begin in September 2018 and 6th grade outreach sessions will begin in October 2018 and will continue through June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66   CSS’s Achievement Mentoring -- a kick-off luncheon will occur in October 2018. Weekly mentoring will start no later than October 2018 and will continue through June 2018.  Play Study Win -- Will provide ELT and afterschool programming from September 2018 - June 2019 in accordance with DYCD requirements and campus needs. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name New Heights Middle School Borough Brooklyn School Number 722 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Jessica Luciano Coach Ms. Kimberly Parkinson ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Tarek Elabsy Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Anaika McKenzie/Science Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kayhesha Gardner/Special E Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Mr. Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Mr. Michael Wiebusch Coach Ms. Danielle Vostrizansky School Counselor Ms. Jennifer Cuervo Parent Ms. Maria Goris Parent Coordinator Ms. Gwendolyn Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 275 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.55% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NA If yes, indicate language(s): NA Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes Performance Series and teacher created assessments to decide on the literacy skills of ELLs. NYSITELL is also utilized as a formative assessment based on which level of students is configured. In addition, it drives the future instruction for ELLs. The data reveals that most our ELLs are advanced with higher scores in speaking than the other three modalities. The data also show that most ELLs read below the appropriate grade level, which requires differentiation in instruction to address all the needs of ELLs. The quantitative data reveal that 17 of our ELLs are at the advanced level; 7 are at the beginner level and 2 are intermediate. Differentiated materials were available for all students to meet their specific needs to promote their linguistic skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? New Heights Middle School evaluates the success of ELLs’ programs by assessing how many have tested out of the NYSESLAT and reached the proficient proficiency level in English. ELLs’ growth within the four modalities is measured as demonstrated by AMAO . In addition, the success of the programs for ELLs is measured by the ELLs’ performance on city and state mandated assessments . This includes NYS Assessments and High <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E-->School Regents Examinations. In addition, emphasis would be placed on the movement of students towards graduation and attaining promotional advancements between grades. The data derived from the ELL periodic assessments for both Fall and Spring help measure the growth in ELLs’ performance. Based on the analysis of the data, success for ELLs’ programs can be measured. Based on the data derived from ELL periodic assessments for Fall 2014 and Spring 2015, there has been improvement in the performance of our ELLs, which supports the validity and reliability of our ENL program. For example a 6th grade student’s score has increased to 90% in the Spring periodic assessments compared to 86.7% in the Fall periodic assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across levels on the NYSITELL show that two of the newly admitted students are at the entering level and the other two are at the expanding level. When comparing the 2013 NYSESLAT to the 2014 NYSESLAT, the data patterns reveal that 3 scholars’ scores have improved from intermediate to advanced levels. The data also show that 7 scholars total scores have partially decreased while the rest of the scholars’ scores have increased. The data patterns still show that writing scores did not improve as much as the other modalities scores. According to 2015 NYSESLAT data, all NHMS ENL scholars’ scores, with no exception, have improved tremendously. About 40% of our ENL have scored proficient on the 2015 NYSESLAT, 2 the entering/beginner students, with only one year of service, have increased their academic performances and now they are at the transitioning level. One of the entering level students is at the expanding level now. The data reveal that our ENL population has terrifically diminished, which reflects the effectiveness of our ENL program. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELL’s program at New Heights Middle School is the Freestanding ENL program. This program provides instruction in English with native language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Our students come from many native backgrounds and English is the mostly common language among them. ELLs are kept in general education classrooms and special education according to their IEPs . Students who share a common native language background in subject area classrooms are grouped together in classes to allow students to access content by interacting with each other at varying levels of proficiency.Also , teachers with groups of ELLs who have a common native language organize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the native language among peers. The ENL teacher who is a native speaker of Arabic and who is also certified to teach Arabic as a Foreign Language pushes into classes and also pulls out ELLs , to work on specific content area tasks enriched with academic <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E-->language development aligned with the CCLS. Instruction for ELLs is scaffold. The ENL teacher and content area teachers are trained in scaffolding strategies. These strategies and ENL methodologies are employed by teachers of ELLs. The ENL program, has accumulated resource materials to address the academic needs of ELLs. These materials are available in all content areas. Translation dictionaries , picture dictionaries and technological resources are also utilized to scaffold the content for our ELLs. Intervention support is also offered to our ELLs via Teenbiz3000. These programs are available in several languages such as Haitian Creole, Spanish and French, and are used by students who still need extra support in their native language. The intervention programs address differentiated needs for ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> c. DL program. If applicable. N/A<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL/ELA per week , Intermediate/Transitioning receive 180 minutes, Advance/Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and Commanding/Proficient students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area per week. The ENL teacher will work with the staff member who is responsible for the schedule as well as the administration to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided rightly according to the proficiency level in each program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school adopts the Free Standing ENL program, which is administered in two models: push in and pull out. The push in takes place within the content areas such as mathematics and English Language Arts in which the ENL teacher scaffolds ELLs through applying the ENL methodologies. ELLs will receive the support they need to promote their linguistic skills and develop their knowledge of the content area. During the pullout, the ENL teacher allows ELLs the opportunity to enrich their vocabulary and to 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  develop their reading and writing skills by applying various successful reading strategies. In addition, ELLs are allowed to employ technological techniques such as Google Translate to promote learning in the first language as well as English throughout the year. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who share a common native language background in subject area classrooms are grouped together in classes to allow them to access content by interacting with each other at varying levels of proficiency in their L1.Also , teachers with groups of ELLs who have a common native language , organize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the native language among peers. Newcomers are also allowed to use their language in writing and making presentations to their group. Translation dictionaries and glossaries are used in classrooms to facilitate comprehension .Bilingual libraries are also available in classrooms Bilingual staff members also facilitate learning by communicating with students in their home language to facilitate comprehension of learning targets . In addition, Technology is successfully utilized in New Heights to evaluate students in their home language. Google Translate is employed to help new comers and beginners to communicate in both English and their home language. Teenbiz3000 has the technology that allows ELLs the opportunity to have the same reading materials in both English and their home languages, which allows the automatic transfer of literacy skills from first language to English. For Spanish speaking ELLs, the additional evaluation conducted in a language other than English is the Spanish LAB. In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in all four modalities throughout the year, teacher-created assessments are used as well as "Continental’s New York ELLs," The book includes activities and strategies for teachers and students to promote proficiency in all four modalities. According to our data, students are doing better in listening and speaking. After reviewing our data our ELLs are facing a greater challenge with reading and writing. The ENL teacher has devoted time to provide our content area teachers with professional development to support the instruction using ENL methodologies. The main focus of the current academic year is non-fiction reading activities and argumentative writing. The content area teachers are analyzing the Periodic Assessment scores and aligning the curriculum to the academic needs of the students. The teachers need to take into consideration the students’ strengths and weaknesses to differentiate instruction. The ENL teacher looks at the patterns of her students in the NYSESLAT and Periodic Assessment scores. The ENL teacher and the subject area teachers are evaluating the results and are preparing lessons aligned to the needs of their students. Teachers are writing lessons that are infusing differentiation of instruction and making students accountable to excel across all subject areas. The school leaders analyze periodic assessment results through the data inquiry team. These results are compared to other forms of students’ data, such as NYSESLAT data, classrooms assessments and previous regents exams. The results are used to evaluate the program and to purchase material that will support the instruction. The content area teachers are presenting to the SLT the requirements and the challenges that their children are expected to face for the specific content area. These students are provided with ample opportunities to excel academically. The scores are significant to evaluate our best practices in providing a curriculum that is going to meet the academic needs of our students. The ENL teacher aligns his curriculum to reinforce the four modalities reading, writing, speaking and listening. The selection of the curriculum is based on the needs of his students. The ENL teacher plans according to the student population and the needs of his students across the four modalities. In our school we do not have a TBE or a Dual Language Program. The instruction is delivered through a Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is provided using the workshop model which includes an opening mini-lesson, group work, and a summary of the lesson. Mr. Elabsy, the ENL teacher works closely with the General Education teachers and provides them with ENL strategies to enhance students’ learning. The ENL teacher and and content area teachers have regular meetings to discuss the individual needs of the ENL students in their classes. The ENL teacher provides content area support by:<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> - Small group instruction -Scaffolding - Relevant Data Analysis of the NYSESLAT, Periodic Assessments, and Acuity scores - Modeling - Visuals - Reading materials with various genres There is also a focus on test taking strategies in order to prepare students for the state exam across the content areas. Content area teachers use ESL strategies that make learning more comprehensible and meaningful for ELLs. The integration of concept development in the content areas with language instruction allows students the opportunity to acquire the academic language of the subject necessary to ensure success in the content areas. Instructional strategies applied in Balanced Literacy, Cooperative Learning, the Workshop Model, and second language acquisitions were also addressed in all ENL classes. The 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  textbooks and instructional materials adhere to the NYS ENL Learning Standards and the City of New York Performance Standards. All ELLs take the New York English as Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) in May which measures students’ progress in English language proficiency and determines students’ eligibility to continue to receive ENL services. We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing by running ongoing formative and summative assessments all year long. These assessment will inform and drive our instruction in a way that will help us to address all our students' needs. Students will be assessed continuously to gather the necessary data that inform the school-wide instruction plan. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The teachers work collaboratively and cooperatively with the cluster teachers using the workshop model and balance literacy approach. Service providers integrate across curriculum areas to ensure understanding. Writing is integrated in all <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E-->subject areas. Students transition together to all subject areas. Classes are structured heterogenously in ELA to help target areas of need. English Language Learners receive between 90 and 360 minutes of Pull-Out and Push in every week depending on their levels as determined by the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT. The Pull-Out services are provided to heterogeneous groups of students. The ENL teacher develops activities that enhance language development while at the same time scaffolds content instruction. SIFE students at the intermediate level who are held over by grade or not making appropriate gains on the NYSESLAT receive an additional period of ENL instruction with particular focus on the NYSED Common Core Standards. Teachers scaffold for SIFE and newcomers using a variety of ELL instructional approaches including concept definition maps, vocabulary-based graphic organizers, and story boards. There is also an after-school program designed for newcomers and SIFE scholars. Furthermore, targeted academic interventions that accelerate vocabulary and content knowledge are utilized in the classroom, pull-out programs, extended day, and after school. Students, regardless of the number of years, work with ENL/Bilingual certified teachers in small groups via push-in and pull-out models. Students have access to leveled libraries with grade age appropriate books in English and their native language. b.) Newcomer ELLs in the school (0-3 years of service) are given much attention based on the fact that they need to acquire English language skills. at the same as academic language required to prepare for ELA testing after one year, and tests in other content areas. These students are taught language through the content areas. All the teachers of ELLs base lessons around a content area and infuse discreet language skills and ENL strategies and methodologies into their teaching. As a result students will see an increase in English language proficiency tests such as (NYSESLAT), while simultaneously preparing for the content area tests. ELLs with less than 3 years (Newcomers) receive ENL instruction from the classroom teacher according to the CR Part 154 mandates of 360 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging levels, 180 minutes of instruction for students at the Transitioning level and 180 minutes per week for Advanced students. ELLs placed in monolingual classes receive small group ENL instruction from the ENL teacher in the Freestanding program that follows the CR Part 154 mandates of 360 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging level students and 180 minutes per week for both Transitioning and Expanding students. Instruction is differentiated according to ongoing assessment and based on data taken from both formal and informal assessment. c.) Most of the ELLs who have received service for 4-6 years are guided toward acquisition of academic language. The past few years of NYSESLAT date reveal that the majority of these students need more intensive support in the reading and writing modalities. Many of them have scored better in the listening and speaking subcategories of the test. Therefore the teachers of ELLs at the school focus their teaching of these students on academic content vocabulary, themes and skills. The pull-out ENL classes are designed to give the students scaffolded instruction and/or small group attention. d.) Long term ELLs in the school are given extra support through AIS, ENL/NLA and after school programs. . e ) Former ELLs in years 1 and 2 after testing Commanding, will have sufficient support in transition to and full immersion in general education classrooms. Former ELLs will have additional scaffolding by general education 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  teachers who had all the required methodologies to handle ELLs. More support is available during our school day and after school programs as well as early bird school programs. Transitional support for former ELLs includes testing accommodations on state exams, continued usage of bilingual glossaries, and easy access to technology resources such as Google Translate. Support for former ELLs will continue in both languages till they reach full proficiency in Academic English. Former ELLs and ELLs who reached the Commanding Proficiency Level receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction either in ELA or Mathematics through push-in model. The ENL teacher pushes in during ELA or Mathematics to allow scholars the opportunity to seek the help they need across content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The multilevel program that New Heights Middle School has blends research-based reading and language skills instruction together with a balance of content area readings and age-appropriate, high interest stories. Foundational phonics are integrated to support phonemic awareness as are academic vocabulary building skills all of which develop transferable academic skills in support of connected learning. In this way, our ELLs are supported through-out their entire academic experience with differentiated materials that meet them at their levels with comprehensible content that meets both them at their level and challenges them to reach above it. The support materials also reach across the four language modalities with audio and video materials, interactive student e-book and interactive CD-ROMs which will be provided to content-area teachers to further support ELLs in their classrooms. Pearson also hosts a companion website that extends and supports learning with more interactive areas for students and teachers with additional online tools and resources for both. Additional support materials that works in tandem with required state-standards are classic literature books differentiated by vocabulary size that allow ELLs to read with their class at their level. The fully integrated assessment tools cover diagnostics through end of book assessments as well as individualized review materials by skill and by strategy. Students can be grouped by need an and/or by class and differentiated materials can be created to reinforce, review or readdress those needs with the same content at every proficiency level. To service the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs the school allows for students remain in the least restrictive environment whenever possible. ENL teacher employs a pull-out model to service the students to enhance their grade level academic skills. After school instruction is provided for all ELL-SWDs to further support their acquisition of academic language and content. ELL-SWD students are given the same rigorous grade level content as their peers. Teachers scaffold and utilize strategies to allow students to access this material through multiple entry points. At New Heights Middle School, we utilize strategies that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Teachers of ELL-SWDS utilize team-teaching strategies, such as parallel grouping, guided reading, graphic organizers, native language glossaries and modified curriculum to ensure access to all academic content. We incorporate more kinesthetic learning as well as technology by purchasing a Smart board to reach both ELL students and address the Special Education ELLs. Integrated software programs that respond to student’s needs are being implemented for Special Education ELLs. With this level of reinforcement and consistency, our goal is to improve academic achievement across the board through scaffolded, sustained instruction using targeted language development strategies. In addition, - <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E-->Review the IEP of each student. Know the specific needs of individual students and the resource personnel and technology needed to meet them. -Provide students with disabilities the opportunity to learn to use text to gain meaning; provide explicit reading instruction with modifications or accommodations. -Explicitly teach pro-social skills (e.g., cooperating with others, listening, asking for help). -Pre-teach or re-teach curricular content and provide additional guided practice before, after, or as appropriate, during class time. -Provide extended learning opportunities to increase a student’s rate of learning. In terms of materials, ELL-SWDs have access to adapted materials and assistive technology. Specialized seating, equipment, and tools are provided so students can complete assigned work. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs are taught by their classroom teachers as well as by ENL teachers. These students are taught with both Special Education and ENL instructional strategies and methodologies. Students with special needs get support from a bilingual SETSS teacher, a speech teacher , and an adaptive physical education teacher. Students’ progress is frequently discussed and evaluated and further strategies are pursued. We provide AIS in ELA and Math through the services of an AIS teacher and Bilingual Coordinator/AIS specialist. To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, our school utilizes special methods of instruction, such as Language Experience Approach, CALLA, total physical response, graphic organizers and scaffolding techniques. New Heights utilizes technology and augmentative communication devices, bilingual and monolingual software programs, and adapted switches; assessment accommodations, such as granting of extra time, oral interviews, demonstrations or visual representations, tasks requiring completion of graphic organizers or cloze sentences instead of essay questions and other assessment tasks that depend heavily on proficiency in English, are incorporated to give students in alternate assessment programs additional support and flexibility. These ELLs will also be placed on Teenbiz3000 for intervention. The materials used for these ELLs are grade appropriate and in line with the CCLS. These materials are however scaffolded by Teachers of ELLs to facilitate accessibility. Scaffolding techniques such as modelling , activiatng and bridging prior knowledge , text representation , meta-cognitive development , contextualization and schema building , are utilized . Students are also given access to content in their home language by teachers of ELLs who incorporate native language support into English instruction and through translation dictionaries and texts in their home language as well as through technology such as Google Translate so that they can develop their linguistic skills in both home language and English. Students are also exposed to a variety of writing experiences and are given opportunities to write for both informal and formal purposes in all subject areas. Writing is also scaffolded for needy students by providing fill in the blanks with a template or writing frame so that students can write sentences or brief paragraphs. Students are also exposed to writing models in English and also with explicit instruction in creating appropriate grade-level writing in various genres. Because vocabulary is a key element in comprehension for ELLs , teachers of ELLs select vocabulary in accordance with specific questions and tasks set forth by a specific unit. Vocabulary includes the words that students need to know in order to reach the learning targets of the lesson. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We monitor all of our students’ progress through the Performance Series online assessment. The ELLs receive additional ELA support through our use of the Moving into English curriculum. We also have a fully certified ESL teacher (Prek-12) who provides pull-out as well as ESL services that supplement the ELA curriculum and other classroom content areas. The ENL teacher is a native speaker of Arabic who is fully fluent in Arabic and is certified to teach Arabic as a Foreign Language in New York State. The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher follow a prescribed pacing calendar to ensure that English language learning is supported in multiple contexts. Our ELLs participate fully in all of our content area programs with the support of their classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. Students in grades 6, 7and 8 are engaged in an interdisciplinary curriculum that spirals around science. Science connections are made in other curriculum areas such as math, social studies, ELA, technology, etc. A great deal of work is done with vocabulary and connecting ideas are included in daily lessons. We utilize the Mathematics curriculum that is supplemented with assessment-based materials. There is also an emphasis on vocabulary in this program, with some work in the etymology of key math terms. Science in taught in a hands-on manner, which allows all students the opportunity to have experience with various concepts. ELLs fully participate in all curriculum areas, including physical education, and technology. All of our identified ELL students attend AIS classes, 45 minutes a day for ELA, science, and math support. Technology is used to help ELL students in reading with the use of vocabulary and language programs. We are able to track the students growth by interim assessments. Native language is integrated in instruction by utilizing Achieve3000 which offered instruction in Spanish, French and Haitian Creole. In addition, utilizing bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, Google Translate and online dictionaries that provide both languages or more allows the integration of native language in instruction. In addition, during Mathematics State Exam, scholars are allowed the opportunity to utilize bilingual glossaries to assist them in transferring prior knowledge and literacy skills from home language into English. 2 6th Grade scholars are offered intervention programs in math (SETTS) and ELA (WILSON). <!--2018-19 SCEP-P 75  {cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New Programs for ELLs 2015 - 2016<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> a. Guidance Intervention b. Celebrations of cultural diversity c. College Visits 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of the programs will be discontinued. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We will continue to make sure that all our ELLs receive the services that they need both mandated and non-mandated and that they have equal access to our school's resources, including technology and performing arts. We will also continue using the following programs because they are differentiated according to grade, age, language competence/development and have proven to be effective for teaching academic language to ELLs. All of our ELLs as well as students in regular education are given opportunities to participate in all <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E-->school programs regardless of language. After school programs allow students the opportunity to have a variety of materials that address the different needs of students according to their proficiency levels. These students also receive support from our Academic Support teachers, Academic Intervention Team, Instructional Support Team and Student Intervention Team. These teams are composed of highly competent teachers, school social workers and guidance counselors. All of our instructional programs are research-based and are provided by professionals who are knowledgeable about the learning needs of ELLs and how to address those needs. Transition Plan for Students Reaching Proficiency: •Notify the parent of the success • Notify the classroom teacher • Give extra support (two years) through ENL services to ensure that the transitional period is a smooth and encouraging one. • Ensure a socially comfortable environment for them (especially those who move from bilingual classes into monolingual ones) • Provide former ELLs with accommodations/support after acquiring proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. Send Parents the yearly NYSESLAT Parent Repo ELLs are offered speech, ENL and extended day services are offered to ELLs at all levels. ELLs fully participate in all curriculum areas, including physical education, technology, and music. All of our identified ELL students attend AIS classes for ELA, science, and math support. Technology is used to help ELL students in reading with the use of vocabulary and language programs. The data team reviews scores and shares with core teachers for future planning and individualized instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Individual laptops, C.D. /Tape recorder and Videos are available and used to support ELLs. Web sites that reflect our present learning themes such as Education City and Study Island are utilized to enforce basic skills and content. Reading materials in different genres, non- fiction texts and vocabulary building dictionaries are used in content areas. Our classroom Listening Center includes native language books and magazines to support our ELL students. All teachers are encouraged to incorporate technology into their instruction to support standards mastery, differentiation for scholar modality strengths, and build scholars' exposure and skill set in preparation for 21st century learning and workplace. All of the teachers have SMART Boards, Macbook laptops, SMART student response systems, and tablets. The depth of technology integration is at the teacher's discretion and comfort 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  level. In order to ensure implementation, teachers participate in ongoing professional development to support them in the integration of technology (e.g. Saturday Professional Development Sessions and professional development). Technological Software such as Teenbiz3000 is successfully employed to promote the linguistic skills of ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Free Standing ENL Pull-out and Push-in model is the only program we provide at New Heights Middle School. Native language support is delivered within our ENL program model by having literature available to the students in their home languages in both the classroom and school library. Our Reading Series provides native language guidelines and references that relate to many of the countries and cultures of our ELL students. Students may respond in their home language both orally and written as needed. Our school provides students will utilize dual-language dictionaries, glossaries and an access to Google Translate that allows them the opportunity to enhance their proficiency in both languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL teacher works with classroom teachers, cluster teachers, the administration, and the data specialist<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> during data meetings and as part of New Heights’ large inquiry team. Together, all personnel work to ensure that our ELLs are receiving all the support they need at their grade level. If, after a careful review of the data and collaborative discussion, we decide that an ELL needs additional services, he or she is placed in our intervention program for either math or ELA. Our ELLs also participate in our math and ELA AIS services during the school day if the data indicate a need for extra support in those areas. All of our former ELLs (those who passed the NYSESLAT in the past two years) are placed in our intervention and advisory programs for additional support. All former ELLs are also given testing accommodations for an additional two years after they passed the NYSESLAT. The materials that New Heights utilizes inside the school are based on Lexiles to ensure that they are both age and level appropriate. In addition, the administration examines the materials used in classrooms to ensure that they are age appropriate. All services support and resources correspond to the needs of all ELL’s. These resources are appropriate for their grade levels and age and are governed by the CCLSof each grade . Research shows that utilizing specific instructional modifiers as well as targeted pedagogical strategies can accelerate ELLs' academic achievement and English language acquisition .Our Freestanding ENL program provides instruction in English with native language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Teachers of ELLs in content areas - Social Studies , Math , and Science , receive PDs on differentiated instruction , especially since most classrooms are composed of students with varying levels of English proficiency and subject area expertise .Some teachers of ELLs share the same L1 with ELLs and they incorporate L1 into English instruction as a support structure to clarify , build knowledge , extend comprehension , and bridge experiences to increase the proficiency of ELLs . Teachers of ELLs also integrate into their instructional practice technology, human resources, -such as paraprofessionals, peers, and parents - , native language materials –such as translation dictionaries and texts in L1-, and flexible groupings to help students construct meaning in English and gain proficiency. Vocabulary selections are made in accordance with specific questions and tasks are set forth by specific units and include the words that students need to know in order to reach the learning targets. The Frayer Model ,a vocabulary development tool that helps to develop a better understanding of complex concepts , is also used to enhance language development. Instruction is also scaffolded using QTEL strategies .Teachers of ELLs also monitor ELLs through the writing experience. Genre specific rubrics are used to help students focus on content and the particular area in which they are developing language and literacy. Supports for our ELLs are tailored according to individual students’ academic and linguistic needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Individual laptops, C.D. /Tape recorder and Videos are available and used to support ELLs. Web sites that reflect our present learning themes such as Education City and Study Island are utilized to enforce basic skills and content. Reading materials in different genres, non- fiction texts and vocabulary building dictionaries are used in content areas. Our classroom Listening Center includes native language books and magazines to support our ELL students. All teachers are encouraged to incorporate technology into their instruction to support standards mastery, differentiation for scholar modality strengths, and build scholars' exposure and skill set in preparation for 21st century learning and workplace. All of the teachers have SMART Boards, Macbook laptops, SMART student response systems, and tablets. The depth of technology integration is at the teacher's discretion and comfort level. In order to ensure implementation, teachers participate in ongoing professional development to support them in the integration of technology (e.g. Saturday Professional Development Sessions and professional development). Technological Software such as Teenbiz3000 is successfully employed to promote the linguistic skills of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities provided for newly enrolled ELL students would include a tour of the school building and grounds as<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> well as the students' mainstream and ELL classrooms. Meeting with the classroom teacher prior to school starting, and ensuring that the student will have a"buddy" to help him or her transition to his/her new school. Also, making time for the administration to meet the new ELLs so they are aware of new ELL students and help to make them feel welcome. All services and resources support and correspond to the needs of all ELLs . These resources are appropriate for their grade levels and age. Instructional materials are modified for SIFE. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our certified ESL teacher attends all professional developments. In addition, we take advantage of the professional developments offered by the Borough, including topics such as, The Common Core Standards: Preparing Teachers of ELLs for the Long View and What you need to know about Response to Intervention (RTI) and English Language Learners. Some staff members attend monthly Professional Development workshops pertaining to both Compliance and techniques and methods that are useful in teaching ELL students. The school administration registers the certified ESL teacher for the professional workshops. Teachers of English Language Learners will be trained throughout the year in the understanding and use of Common Core standards. These trainings will include in depth analysis of the expectations set forth by the new standards in writing, reading and math. Teachers will receive ongoing training in the development of rigorous writing tasks, rubric utilization to score student work and the identification of instructional strategies to address writing deficiencies. ALL Teachers 0f ELLs will continue to participate in high quality professional development workshops provided by the Office of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. (OELL) Teachers of LEPs will attend workshops that pertain but not limited to, differentiated instruction, using data to plan instruction for ELLs, and QTEL scaffolding strategies. The following is the updated current professional developments list: 9/2 Refining our Curriculum; Maximizing Co-Teaching 09/18 Understanding ELLs: Reaching Educators’ Hearts and Minds (Mr. Elabsy) 9/22 Hochman Writing Strategies: Professional Development Workshop 1 (Mr. Elabsy) 9/29 Hochman Writing Strategies: Professional Development Workshop 2 (Mr. Elabsy) 10/13 Hochman Writing Strategies: Professional Development Workshop 3 (Mr. Elabsy) 10/19 Curriculum Mapping 10/20 Hochman Writing Strategies: Professional Development Workshop 4 (Mr. Elabsy) 10/26 Co-Teaching: How to Maximize the Adults in the Classroom 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  11/03 Enhancing Instructional supports in the English as a New Language (ENL) and the integrated ENL classroom (Mr. Elabsy) 11/3 Multiple Entry Points 11/9 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series 11/24 Analyzing Special Education and ELLs Work Products 12/7 Increasing Writing across the Curriculum 12/21 Integrating Hochman Strategies 1/25 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series 2/9 Analyze Your Data through Scholar Work 3/14 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series09 4/11 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series 4/12 Analyze Your Data through Scholar Work 5/9 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series 5/16 Hochman: How to Scaffold Writing in Your Planning 6/13 Use of Technology to Address ELL Needs Series 6/20 Analyzing the Impact for the 2015-2016 School Year Teachers of LEPs will continue to incorporate ENL strategies in the instruction of LEPs across all content areas.<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> All teachers who are responsible for the instruction of LEP students during the regular school day will participate in PD activities offered by OELL .The following teachers will participate in professional development activities: The ENL Teacher , the ELA Teacher , and the Math Teacher will participate in the professional development offered by OELL. Other teachers who are responsible for the instruction of LEPs during the day will participate in workshops that pertain , but no limited to differentiated instruction ,using data to plan instruction for ELLs ;QTEL scaffolding strategies ;language allocation policy and looking at students' work. Our school assigns a fifty-minute professional development workshops on Wednesdays on a weekly basis. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ALL ELL staff will participate in weekly 80-minute seminar-workshops designed to enable the teachers to examine the effectiveness of their teaching, to explore and implement instructional models and academic intervention strategies aimed at improving ELLs’ outcomes in standardized exams, and the construction of school-wide assessments. In addition our ELL department meets two additional times a month for inquiry team projects, where they use classroom data to research, design and implement, two to five week research projects, specifically designed for ELLs, to align our curriculum more closely with CCSS. We will continue with our professional development to increase ELL students’ performance. In addition to the professional development workshops with which our school provides teachers and staff, our teachers attend a variety of workshops provided by the OELL and Brooklyn South. Our fully-certified ENL teacher attends all the workshops provided by the Office of English Language Learners that mainly concentrates on how to help ELL students smoothly transit from one educational stage to another. During the school weekly PD’s, teachers do presentations to turn key the information they receive in the workshops they attend outside the school. Our guidance counselor will continue to provide assistance to staff to work with ELLs as they transition from the Elementary to Middle school, and from Middle school to High school. School will work with and provide feedback and resources on programs and other offerings that are available to students. Our school guidance counselor, Ms. Curevo, keeps on attending many professional developments that concentrate on the transition process for ELLs from elementary school to middle school and from middle school to high school as well. To illustrate, Ms. Curevo attends all the monthly district professional development workshops that mainly addresses the needs of ELLs and their parents. For our scholars transitioning to HS, we provide their families with the HS Directory translated in their home languages or the language they prefer. All the city-wide and borough fairs have the HS Application process translated in their home languages as well. Logging into the HS Resource section at school.nyc.gov is highly recommended to our ELL families so they have access to the resources. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  Our school will meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development by allowing our highly sophisticated staff to bring their experience, expertise, multiple licenses, and knowledge to the table. The ENL teacher who is fully TESOL certified (k-12) and who is also certified to teach Arabic as a Foreign Language in New York State and who is fully certified to offer Translation and Interpretation Services in Arabic in NYC will convene with other content area teachers to plan and create professional development workshops that address the above needs and requirements. These workshops will aim at creating programs that will promote and enhance the existing home language skills for ELLs. The professional development our school will offer will target the best strategies for language acquisition, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content area instruction for ELLs. Records of all these workshops will be kept in a specific file in the main office. In addition, all professional development records are on Google Drive, which helps the school to maintain and track the required hours for all teachers. Teachers will participate in all the workshops that Network 411 and OELL offer for teachers of ELLs to keep them updated. Ms. Williams, the parent coordinator and the school secretary are responsible for keeping and maintaining the records. Ms. Williams, the parent coordinator is responsible for reaching out to parents either via phone, emails or mail. In addition, our school provides all teachers with translation and interpretation services to allow them the opportunity to better connect to parents either through our bilingual staff who are fluent in Haitian Creole, Spanish and Arabic or though the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in case our staff does not cover the required language. Teachers have already received all the information regarding how to make the best use of the Translation and Interpretation Services offered by the DOE. Moreover, our school sometimes hires translators from agencies approved by the DOE. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent workshops are implemented on a monthly basis and include the following topics; How to assist your child with subject area homework, Updates on School Activities,. Resources to Assist your Child at School and in the Community, Tutoring services, High School. Application Process, Recreational Activities, Workshops on Bullying Cyber Safety, Discussions on Dual Language Programs, Programs. for ELLs, Community Health fair, etc. All workshops, whether specifically geared for ELLs , have translators available for non-English speaking family members. The ELLs parents also attend the mandated meetings, e.g. Title II Rights of the ELLs. A log is kept for these meetings by the parent Coordinator. Of course, translators in the needed languages are provided in all meetings. New Heights Middle School provides translation and interpretation services to the parents of ELL's. We usually provide these services through our bilingual staff who are fully proficient in languages such as Arabic, Spanish and Haitian Creole. In case we do not have a staff member to cover a required language, we use the DOE translation services and sometimes we use the services provided by other legal, professional agencies.NHMS partners with other agencies or Community Based Organizations to provide workshops on services to ELL parents. The Parent Coordinator is the Liaison between the Parents and the Administration. In a timely fashion, Ms. Williams disseminates information of importance to Parents of ELLs. This would include but not limited to activities they could do with their children, important resources for them in the larger community, upcoming school events, deadlines for services, etc. Written notices, verbal communication, as well as the school's auto-dial system is delivered in the parent's native language. Translation services are provided at meetings. Our school recognizes that families and other community members are a vital part of student academic and social success . We also consider family involvement an important ingredient for a successful educational program .Our parent coordinator keeps contact with our ELLs’ parents by inviting them to visit our school and informing them about various workshops designed specifically for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs also receive school related materials and communications in their home language as well as English. Orientations for ELLs are scheduled periodically to inform parents about the ELLs’ programs so that they can make program choices , familiarize them with the school system and the different programs that are offered. These meetings are also available in the parent’s home language. We also evaluate the needs of parents by looking at the students and parent surveys from the School Progress Report, and concerns bought by the PTA. Open House hours per grade are scheduled for parents. Usually, administration and / or guidance counsellor takes the parents on a tour of the school where they can see students at work and experience the various programs offered throughout the school year.<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  Parents are important partners in the education of all of our students including ELLs and Special Education students. Parental involvement at New Heights Middle School is comprehensive and includes a number of parent engaging activities and meetings. Our parents are involved in PTA activities , SLT , Parent Teacher conferences, disciplinary meetings , Family Math and Family Literacy Meetings , and Cultural diversity celebrations International . Our parent coordinator serves as a conduit by which parents participate in their child's overall development at NHMS. We have improved our level of communication with parents by providing them with translated resources in their native languages .We have a new parent support system in place to make the students' families feel more welcomed and to give them access to the tools they need in order to fully participate in the education of their children . The ELLs’ Parental calendar for the 2015-2016 school year includes the following: - ELLs parent orientation meetings, telephone conferences with parents of ELLs, monthly Family Math and Literacy Programs, access training to NYC DOE web sites, parent workshops to access technology programs such as Teenbiz 3000. The following is our school calendar for 2105/16 parent workshops: Community School District 17 Month by Month Parent Workshop Plan (2015-2016 School Year) Parent Coordinator: Gwendolyn Williams New Heights Middle School School: New Heights Middle School 17K722 Indicate at least (2) Workshops per month The Workshop Titles/Topics Resources Needed September 5:30pm-8: 30pm October 10:00 am -11:00 am 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  Who attends workshop. November 10:00 am-11:00 am December 9:00am -10:00 am 9:00 am -10:00 am 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  January February 2/23/16 March April 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  May 5/6/16 June 6/10/16 Some Dates and Titles May Change Due to Scheduling. *Coffee & Donuts will happen on a monthly basis. The topic will be determined based on the needs of the families. 2018-19 SCEP-P 84  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 85 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ativia Sandusky, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Heights Middle School School DBN: 17K722 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Jessica Luciano Title Principal Mr. Michael Wiebusch Assistant Principal Ms. Gwendolyn Williams Parent Coordinator Mr. Tarek Elabsy ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Maria Goris Parent Ms. Kayesha Gardner Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Anaika McKenzie Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kimberly Parkinson Coach Ms. Danielle Vostrizansky Coach Ms. Jennifer Cuervo School Counselor Mr. Clarence Ellis Dr. Soeurette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brooklyn South N/A N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 11/13/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 87  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K722 School Name: New Heights Middle School Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jennifer Cuervo School Counselor Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All newly-admitted scholars' parents and/or guardians are given the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) upon admission to indict the primary language spoken at home. If a language other than English is spoken at home, the newly admitted scholar will become eligible to take the NYSITELL to determine their linguistic proficiency in English. Utilizing the data in HLIS allows the school the opportunity to update the Home Language on ATS and simultaneously assess language preferences of parents or guardians. To accommodate the linguistic needs of parents and/or guardians who speak a language other than English, the school utilizes all the services provided by the NYC DOE's Language and Interpretation Unit (i.e. translated forms, phone calls) in addition to private vendors providing translation and interpretation services. In addition, New Heights Middle School utilizes its staff linguistic skills who are native speakers of Haitian Creole and Spanish to help communicate with parents who speak Haitian Creole, French, Arabic, Albanian, or Spanish. As a result to the HLIS, emergency contact cards, parent questionnaires and the NYS Learning Survey are made available to our families in their selected language. 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  Our data indicate that the background language of our parents are essentially Haitian Creole, French, Arabic, Albanian, or Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Albanian Arabic French Haitian Creole 1 12 4 14 305 12 87.64 3.45 302 13 86.78 3.74 .29 3.45 1.15 4.02 1 13 5 14 .29 3.74 1.44 4.02 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Back to School Night BBQ Flyer September 1st Scholar Led Conferences Mid November, and Mid February Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Flyer was created June 2017. LAC submitted the flyer and Translated Request Form during the summer to ensure the documents were translated by September 1st. Flyers were them mailed to the families in their requested language as well as given to scholars during the first week of school. Flyers for the event will be submitted to TRS two months prior to events. In addition, outreach calls to families will 2018-19 SCEP-P 89  Weekly on going announcements A month before the events Monthly family nights (i.e Sip & Paint Night, Holiday Potluck) A month before the event take place by the staff who also speaks the family's home language or homeroom teachers will use the over-the-phone translation unit. New Heights now has a twitter, Facebook, and Instagram account. We use this resource to also help our families translate the news and announcements into their home language using the websites features. LAC will have the flyer and information translated a month before the month using the TRF. In addition, news will be posted on our social media accounts. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Scholar Led Conferences December 14th and March 22nd Monthly family workshops Once a month PTA Meetings Once a month Once a month SLT interpretation service(s)? Our school will provide interpretation services to parents using the following ways: Staff members that are bilingual Use the translation unit for languages we are unable to provide service. Staff members that speak the home language of our requested family member will translate during the workshops or we will use the over-the-phone translation unit. Staff members that speak the home language of our requested family member will translate during the meetings or we will call the over-the-phone translation unit. Staff members that speak the home language will translate during the meetings as requested. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 90  In an event of a school emergency, we will notify all families in a timely manner in their home language. All emergency folders inform staff members of the home language of our families. LAC, parent coordinator, and school secretary will use the over-the-phone translation unit to contact families. In addition, if administration deems it necessary, a post will be made on our social media accounts to inform and support our families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On the first day of school, all educators received a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-63. Our LAC will use the resources shared during the mandatory PD to provide a thorough workshop for our educators on the resources that are available for them and the importance of using their resources. In addition, we will provide copies of the resources on our school-wide google drive so educators can refer to it when needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) New Heights will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We will obtain translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, through http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm. Additionally, when more than 10% of the children at the school speak a primary language that is neither English or a covered language, we will obtain assistance from the Translation and Interpretation Unit and post signs to assist families once at our site. To conclude, to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, our school will provide the following: (A) Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities are sent in translated version in September of each year. (B) The sign regarding the availability of interpretation services are posted in the main office, at the front entrance and in the parent room. (C) Staff members will ensure that parents are aware of translation services provided to them. 2018-19 SCEP-P 91  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from families through written surveys and oral communication either over the phone or via face-to-face group or one-on-one meetings in which families have the opportunity to express their opinions and make suggestions on the language services. At the beginning of the school year, we provide families with a volunteer survey to gauge their availability and interests. This form is translated for our families. During Scholar Led Conferences, we ask parents to complete an online survey in their chosen language for additional feedback. The parent coordinator is in communication with our families either by phone, email, or their choice to ensure that all the services provided to families are satisfactory. 2018-19 SCEP-P 92 
