2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K745 School Name: BROOKLYN INSTITUTE FOR LIBERAL ARTS Principal: ANN-MARIE HENRY-STEPHENS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts 17K745 School Number (DBN): 331700011745 9-12 600 Kingston Ave, Brooklyn NY 11203 718-221-1097 Phone Number: 718-221-1794 Fax: Ann-Marie Henry-Stephens ahenrystephens@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ann-Marie Henry-Stephens Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Adam Brulhardt Frances Butts-Jeffrey CicilyHumes-James SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Frances Butts-Jeffrey TBD TBD NA District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd RM F11, Brooklyn NY 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515 Phone Number: 718-368-8517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauricière de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 617-212-4934 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ann-Marie Henry-Stephens Adam Brulhardt Frances Butts-Jeffrey Cassandra Drew Frances Butts-Jeffrey TBD TBD NA Cicily Humes-James Diane Christmas Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/CSA Representative Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sophia Rudder Colette Jules Charlene Pereira John Downes-Angus Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts we educate and nurture each child to develop his or her fullest potential. Our inquiry-based approach to a rigorous, standards-based liberal arts curriculum and our collaborative approach to our learning environment ensure that our students have the academic knowledge and skills necessary to succeed in college and in their future careers. At the Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts, we “Believe, Inquire, Learn and Achieve” together so that our students can fully immerse themselves in 21 st century life challenges and successes. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts is a high school with 419 students from grade 9 through grade 12. The school's population comprises 86.16% Black, 9.31% Hispanic, 0.48% White, 1.19% Asian and 2.86% other students. Boys account for 45.11% of the students enrolled and girls account for 54.89%. 4.53% of our population are ELLs and 18.14% are special education students. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 92% and the 4-year graduation rate was 95%; 90% of the ELLs and 90% of the SWDs graduated in 4 years. BILA's strength is its culture of high expectations and support for all students, staff, and families. We have worked tremendously hard to build a culture in which every school member feels invested in the work that we do. The leadership, faculty and staff of this school work hard to ensure that we live our mission statement. Our high attendance (average 92%) and graduation rates over the last 3 years (93%, 97% and 95%) are evidence of our successful, rigorous school culture. In addition, every BILA student who has ever applied to college has been accepted to college. Last year, we again received the honor of being named School of Distinction by CFES Brilliant Pathways. “CFES Brilliant Pathways partners with hundreds of colleges, school districts and corporations to: introduce students to college and career possibilities; provide needed resources to educators, such as professional development, support and evaluation, and workshops; help students and families demystify the path to college” (https://brilliantpathways.org/). In addition, we were able to secure our first Posse Scholarship through The Posse Foundation, an organization that “identifies, recruits and trains individuals with extraordinary leadership potential. Posse Scholars receive full-tuition leadership scholarships from Posse Partner College and Universities (www.possefoundation.org). In the 2018-2018 school year BILA became a NYCDOE Teaching Academy. “A NYC Teaching Academy (NYCTA) is a high-need, high performing school where five or more pre-service teachers complete a robust, full semester clinical experience under the tutelage of trained cooperating teachers (Collaborative and Lead Coaches) and supportive administrators” ( https://nycta.weebly.com). At the end of the school year, we were happy to hire the 3 teachers who trained with us during the school year. As we look toward the future and continue to strengthen out academic core, BILA elected to become an AP for All School. AP for All is part of the NYCDOE’s Equity and Excellence agenda. We have always had at least 2 AP courses per year, but now as a member of the NYCDOE’s AP for All Program, we are able to offer 5 AP courses for the 2018-2019 school year—Statistics, English Language and Composition, English Literature and Composition, Human Geography and Environmental Science. AP for All offers us another opportunity to ensure our students are college and career ready by giving us extra supports to improve student performance on AP exams. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Most of the students at this school are immigrants or children of immigrants from the English speaking Caribbean islands. This population of students is not traditionally identified as English Language Learners, but they in fact speak and write different dialects that are native to their home countries and impact their language acquisition skills. We, therefore, have the systems in place (such as extra literacy classes for all 9th and 10th graders) to ensure that these students get the academic and social/emotional support they need to succeed in high school, then in their college and career opportunities. Most of our students are economically disadvantaged and in order to ensure they get a jump on opportunities for college and career, we offer Early College and College Now classes for students as early as 10th grade. We have partnered with Long Island University and Brooklyn College to provide these opportunities. We have also partnered 2018-19 CEP 10  with Princeton University through one of its alumni organization—Princeton Reachout 56-81-09. Twice per year, current students from Princeton University spend a week in our school working with 11th and 12th graders on college essays, college applications, scholarship applications, choosing the right colleges, etc. They also meet with the parents of our students to tell their own stories and explain why parent support is essential to the college going process. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the last year, we continued to work on developing stronger systems and protocols around all elements of the Framework for Great Schools and celebrating our third graduating class. Our continued strength is in the area of Supportive Environment. Every year we exceed expectations in that category and our data supports that. 95% of our cohort graduated on time and every student who applied to college was accepted to a college of their choice--100% college acceptance. At BILA, we value collaboration and relationships and have built structures to ensure that these values are fully developed in our professional learning community. Teachers and staff meet several times a week in full faculty meetings every Wednesday, grade team meetings, common planning sessions, mentoring and inter-visitation sessions to plan curriculum, to review data, and to guide and counsel each other. During our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a Well-Developed rating for having a “culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations.” To achieve our goals we:  Hired 3 guidance counselors to ensure students have social-emotional support when needed  Have a strong Advisory programs that addresses  Program and support our students to ensure they finish most of their high school requirements around credits and state exams by the end of 10th grade.  Partnered with CUNY and LIU to offer Early College and College Now programs for students beginning in 10th grade.  Partnered with CFES Brilliant Pathways a national non-profit organization dedicated to helping under-served students prepare for, gain access to, and succeed in college.  Partnered with Princeton University. The university sends a group of Princeton students to BILA twice per year to spend weeks with our students working on building college readiness skills  Celebrate good citizenship through a Merit System and Advisee of the Month Award.  Offer numerous trips to colleges for all grades to promote College Readiness as early as possible  Offer a strong Advisory program to promote good citizenship, college readiness and the social/emotional well-being of all students  Aggressively monitor attendance to ensure students are in school every day.  Hold workshops for parents around college readiness  Send progress reports out to parents once every 6 weeks to ensure they are kept informed about their children's academic performance As we look toward the future and continue to strengthen out academic core, BILA elected to become an AP for All School. AP for All is part of the NYCDOE’s Equity and Excellence agenda. We have always had at least 2 AP courses per year, but now as a member of the NYCDOE’s AP for All Program, we are able to offer 5 AP courses for the 2018-2019 school year—Statistics, English Language and Composition, English Literature and Composition, Human Geography and Environmental Science. AP for All offers us another opportunity to ensure our students are college and career ready by giving us extra supports to improve student performance on AP exams. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K745 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 381 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 6 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 83.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.8% 8.7% 0.3% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 52% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 94% 88% 91.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 66 40 1 91.2% 6.6% 15.5% 87.7% 1.3% 2.1% 4 17% 4.8 N/A N/A 90% 88% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At BILA, students are engaged in rigorous coursework and that is reflected in our school data and on our rating of Meeting Standards on the School Quality Guide. As teachers work to transition from the Common Core Learning Standards to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS), they are aware of what they need to do in order to help students meet these new standards. Coursework in all subjects are cognitively demanding in preparation for career and college readiness. However, our struggle to get students to meet New York State College and Career ready in Mathematics continues. Compared to other district 17 high schools, BILA is doing very well in getting students to pass the Common Core Algebra 1 Regents exams. Last school year, over 70% of our students took and passed this exam in 9th grade. All of the students in our graduating class in June 2019 took and passed their math exams; however, only 16% of these students were New York State College and Career Ready (grades of 80 or higher). In order to better outcome for our students, we have decided to reorganize and restructure our Math curriculum and programming for all students. We are making changes at every level in order to ensure students are engaged and eager to do Math. All 9th graders take 7 hours of Math per week—3 hours of Statistics, 3 hours of Algebra 1 and 1 hour of Intervention specifically focused on answering the type of questions they would get on short answer section of the Algebra 1 Regents Exam. Every 10th graders takes Algebra II, 11th graders take Geometry and SAT Math, while 12th graders take a new College Math Course. We have hired another 9th grade Math teacher to ensure that class sizes are smaller (9th grade classes average 26 students each). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 20% of the graduating cohort (Cohort U) will meet New York State College Readiness Standards in Math and 25% of all 9th grade students (Cohort X) taking the Common Core Algebra 1 will meet New York State College Readiness Standards in Math. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Activity—In September, teachers will meet to analyze 2017-2018 Regents data in order to determine instructional changes needed for the 2018-2019 school year. 2. . Activity--Teachers will develop Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS)-aligned units of study in Algebra I and Algebra II. Teachers meet weekly in grade teams and department teams to assess student work and make adjustments in instruction as needed to ensure that students are making progress on developing appropriate skills and content knowledge. 3. Teachers will receive professional development during the school year to support their instructional efforts in building students’ mathematical skills. 4. To involve parents, we will: a) Hold a curriculum night in September 2018 to introduce and review Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) to parents. b) Create information and study packets providing strategies to help students learn how to develop their mathematical skills c) Hold workshops for parents to learn strategies to support their children in developing stronger Math skills. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Coordinators and Math Peer Collaborative Teacher Teachers Weekly from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Coordinators and Math and Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Coordinators and Math Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Department Coordinators and Peer Collaborative Teachers Weekly from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Monthly from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, BILA will hold its annual Curriculum Night. During curriculum, parents will be exposed to inquiry-based lessons and will receive copies or access to copies to of curriculum for all core content area subjects. During monthly PTA meetings, parents will a continuous curriculum segment where they will participate in learning activities and be given opportunities to engage in meaningful discussions around what their children are learning in BILA's classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers’ schedules will be created so that they are able to meet as teams several times during the school day/week and for extended PD sessions on Wednesdays from 12:00—2:15 pm and from 3:00-5:00pm when necessary. 2. When necessary, teachers will be paid per sessions for additional hours of professional development sessions around rigorous instruction (summer professional developed included). 3. An instructional coach from Brooklyn South FSC will work with teachers across content areas on designing rigorous inquiry-based learning activities for students using Depth of Knowledge principles. Emphasis will be placed on developing Math skills. 4. Two teachers were promoted to serve as Peer Collaborative Teachers for the 2018-2019 school year. These teachers will support the professional learning of their colleagues through peer coaching and utilization of professional learning structures to improve student learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 30, 2019, 10% of students in Cohort U will get a score of 80 or higher after re-taking the Algebra 1 Regents exam. By January 30, 2019, 50% of students in Cohort X will have a passing grade of 80 or higher in their Math classes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will evaluate students’ progress towards reaching proficiency after every unit of study (every 6 weeks) but will use end of term one Regents exams as a final benchmark for students in Cohort U. 2018-19 CEP 15  9th Grade students (Cohort X) will take the NYC Performance Assessment tests in Algebra 1 in October. This data will be used as a baseline for the school year. These students will take end of term 1 final exams in January 2019 and that data will be used to monitor progress toward the goal of getting 25% of students to reach college and career readiness standards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on academic indicators in the School Quality Guide, BILA students are succeeding but we need to work on supporting students to meet the challenge of becoming truly “college-ready” by their senior year. For example, on our 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 93.3% of the students earned enough credits in the 1st year, 93.2 % for students in their 2nd Year, and 84.39% for students in their 3rd Year. However, our students do not readily choose to take on more challenging courses in their upper grades and college- ready metrics show that we are approximately in the 61st percentile of our peer group as defined by percentage of students meeting the college-ready benchmark for CUNY. We have to make a concerted effort to change our students’ mindset and help to develop stronger diligence within them so that they readily take on more challenging courses and activities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Eighty percent of all students will identify and meet a “stretch” academic goal through advisor-facilitated personalized learning planning by June of 2019. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development with all advisors to facilitate understanding of “stretch goal” concept. Teachers Grade teams will identify ways to track student identification of stretch goals and to make those goals visible in a way that also allows for change and responsiveness . Teachers Students Stretch goals shared in parent-teacher conferences. Students Advisors will meet with all advisees in one to one academic conferences to assess students’ progress with meeting stretch goals. Parents Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers, Students Advisors September 2018—October 2018 September 2018--October 2018 October 2018 October 2018--June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018 (or any later date of enrollment) parents with school staff will review copies of curriculum for various classes and be asked to sign pacts indicating their willingness to support their children's academic and social emotional success by fulfilling the terms of the Parent Involvement Policy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Consultancy from outside resource on personalized learning planning and student-led conferencing. 2018-19 CEP 18  2. Per session facilitation of teacher teams, 3. Partial funding of teacher salaries for Advisory class program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, using end of term 1 scholarship data, advisors will be able to identify at least 1 stretch goal for their advisees and anecdotal documentation to show the advisees progress toward meeting that goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advisors will track progress through the use of anecdotal documentation on Google Docs and will use end of year student achievement data from Jupiter Grades and STARS to assess advisees' success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. BILA has an established culture of teacher collaboration as noted in our last 2017-2018 Quality Review (we were rated Proficient) teachers work together in common planning sessions, grade teams, department/content area teams during every week of the school year. We would like to move that rating to a well-developed and enhance the impact team members can have on student performance. Specifically, we need to work on analysis of information regarding student outcomes and adjustment of instructional decisions at the team level. Our Advance data shows that 52% of our teachers were rated effective or highly effective on component 3b--Using Questioning and Discussion; 52% of our teachers were rated effective or highly effective on 3c--Engaging Students in Learning. While 56% of our teachers were rated effective or highly effective in 3d--Using Assessment in Instruction. We would like to move at least 60% of our teachers into the “effective” rating across all of these components. Specifying additional grade team roles, setting clear goals for each and every interaction, evaluating progress towards each goal will foster greater accountability while interdependency will foster improved practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the overall course pass rates via scholarship reports for teachers who had below 95% pass rate the previous year, and a 10% increase in the number of teachers rated effective or highly effective across components 3b, 3c and 3d. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Identify teacher roles within grade teams and department teams including but not limited to Coordinator, Data Manager, Grade Team Leader, Inquiry Team Leader, etc. Teachers Sept. 2018--June 2019 Provide professional development opportunities (administrator-led, teacher-led, consultant-led and FSC-led) over the course of the school year Teacher leaders facilitate grade team meetings, department meetings and professional development to raise student achievement Peer Collaborative Teachers, Lead Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Outside Consultants Sept. 2018--June 2019 Sept.2018--June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers’ schedules will be created so that they are able to meet as teams several times during the school day/week and for extended PD sessions on Wednesdays from 12:00—2:15 pm. 2. When necessary, teachers will be paid per sessions for additional hours of professional development sessions for teams 2018-19 CEP 21  3. Consultants and administrators will work with teachers teams on strengthening instructional practices with emphasis on Danielson's 3B, 3C and 3D components. 4. Two teachers were promoted to serve as Peer Collaborative Teachers during the 2018-2019 school year. These teachers will support the professional learning of their colleagues through peer coaching and utilization of professional learning structures to improve student learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, teachers will be expected to show at least 1% increase in scholarship data over the same period last year. By February 2019, after being observed at least twice, teachers will show an improvement in MOTP ratings in 3B, 3C and 3D compared to the same period last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher growth will be evaluated using Teacher-Scholarship data generated via STARS at the end of term one and MOTP data generated from Advance data in January 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  o A primary goal for Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts since its inception in 2012 has been to build a structure for distributed leadership in order to develop a strong foundation for continued sustainability. Our goal is to create an infrastructure in which the success of the school does not rely on any one individual but rather on systems of individuals who are trained and prepared to manage and execute specific bodies of work so that the absence of a teacher or staff member does not significantly or negatively affect productivity. BILA offer multiple opportunities for distributed leadership among the staff, including Peer Collaborative Teachers, Grade Level Leaders, Department Leaders, Individualized Education Program (IEP) coordinator, English as a New Language (ENL) coordinator, Coordinator of Student Activities, and Transition Team Leader, among others. Teachers serve on numerous committees, including hiring committee, School Leadership Team (SLT), Cabinet, School Implementation Team (SIT), among others. BILA’s leadership team also continues to encourage peer-to-peer professional development among the staff during the 2018-19 school year. Leadership at the Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts is Effective. According to the 2017-2018 NYCDOE School Survey Report: 93% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. 2018-19 CEP 23  95% of families feel that the principal works to communicate a sense of community in the school. 97% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. 93% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. 100% of teachers say that the principal understands how children learn. According to the 2017-2018 NYCDOE School Survey Report only 83% teachers say that the principal participates in instructional 2018-19 CEP 24  planning with teams of teachers. Also, teacher-principal trust was 82%. BILA administrators' goal, therefore, is improve time spent working alongside teachers to ensure their progress towards become effective and highly effective teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, BILA’s administration will provide supportive, goal-oriented, ongoing feedback to ensure that at least 60%% of its teachers demonstrate either effective or highly effective practice across domains 2 and 3 of the Danielson rubric. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? As part of the new teacher orientation and staff reorientation, BILA’s leadership team will provide professional development, such as New Teacher Orientation and Leadership Training to set clear expectations for teacher performance for the school year. Teachers August- Principal, Assistant Guidance Sept. 2018 Principals Counselors During IPC meetings, administration will work with teachers to analyze MOTP data, to reflect on practice and create professional learning and practice goal for the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers Sept.2018--June 2019 Administrators will ensure that all observation reports reference the prior report, and provide structured, focused feedback on areas of need. Administrators will follow up with timely check-ins and one on one meetings to provide meaningful support. Teachers Sept. 2018--June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Peer Collaborative Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals and Peer Collaborative Teachers Based on teacher needs, as evidenced by observation reports, BILA’s leadership team will provide professional development to meet the needs of all teachers, including technology training and school-wide data assessment. Teachers Sept. 2018--June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September and continuing throughout the school year, parents will be given numerous opportunities (PTA meeting, SLT meeting, Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, etc.) to engage with school staff and other parents around school leadership and parent engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  FSC Lead Teacher Training Sessions In-house Teacher-Leader Development Sessions Coordinators Meeting Cabinet Meetings with Administrators Consultant-led training sessions Per-session for teachers Per session for administrators Professional development conference registration fees and associated costs Teacher schedules that allow for time to meet with peers and administration during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of BILA’s teachers will all receive at least one effective rating in both domains 2 and 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation reports - Student surveys - Teacher surveys - Parent surveys - Student achievement data (course grades, interim assessments, Regents exam scores) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-2018 school year, we employed several strategies to get parents more engaged with the school community with some limited success. We had an art grant for Parents as Partners which enabled parents and their children to create a mural for display in the school. We produced and performed 2 plays and art shows for parents to see their children's artistic capabilities on display. Like many NYC high schools, BILA has a small, core group of parents that participate in school wide activities. These parents attend PTA meetings, SLT meetings, school events, and student run events. These parents , however, are only a small subset of the parent population and many more need to be involved in the school community. According to the 2017-2018 PCAR reports approximately 37% of parents attended our last Parent-Teacher conference in the spring of 2018, and approximately 10% of parents attend monthly PTA meetings. We were, however, able to get over 60% of the parents to take the NYCDOE School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community based organizations resulting in a 10% increase in parent attendance and participation in PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and school events. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Within their professional learning community, staff will receive training on strategies to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency so as to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. All parents and teachers will be invited to attend regularly scheduled parent and school meetings (Monthly PTA Meetings. SLT Meetings, Annual Title I Parent Meetings) to inform and strengthen the parent and school community connection. The school will use electronic tools (School website, Jupiter grades, School Messenger, NYC School Account) to give parents 24-hour access to all possible information (student grades, completion of assignments, attendance and punctuality, etc.) that will enable them to help their children succeed. To ensure parent of ELLs are engaged and informed in all school activities, we will ensure that all documents and messages are translated in all of the languages of students in our school community. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, PTA President, Parent Coordinator Parents Sept 2018 -June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, PTA President, Parent Coordinator ELL Parents Sept 2018 -June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, PTA President, Parent Coordinator, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit, Bi-Lingual staff members. Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers and Guidance Counselors will use at least 60 minutes of professional development time every other week to engage in parent outreach (parent meetings, phone conferences, emails, letters). Teachers Guidance Counselors Bi-Monthly Sept 2018 -June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA members SLT members Teachers and Staff Per Session PTA Title 1 Funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, PCAR reports should indicate a 5 % increase in the number of parents participating in school-related events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PCAR report data will be used to tabulate parent participation percentage for the school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grade data is reviewed every 6 weeks Data from Progress reports Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring with use of instructional packets, Achieve 3000 ( Interactive online reading programs Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one tutoring During, after school and on Saturdays Mathematics Science Social Studies Referrals from teachers. Grade data is reviewed every 6 weeks. Data from Progress reports. Referrals from teachers. Grade data is reviewed every 6 weeks Data from Progress reports. Referrals from teachers. Grade data is reviewed every 6 weeks. Data from Progress reports. Tutoring with use of instructional packets, and inter-active online program, IXL Math, for Algebra, Geometry and Trigonometry. Tutoring with the use of instructional packets and using online programs such as Brainpop and Castle Learning Tutoring with use of instructional packets and using online programs such as Brainpop and Castle Learning Small group and one-to-one tutoring During, after school and on Saturdays Small group and one-to-one tutoring During, after school and on Saturdays Small group and one-to-one tutoring During, after school and on Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 31 Group and individual sessions as needed During and after school and on weekdays At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referrals from teachers. Grade data is reviewed every 6 weeks. Data from Progress reports Referrals from teachers and guidance counselors Student attendance data Students are scheduled to see the school’s guidance counselors weekly and members of the SBST as needed for: I ndividual Counseling, Group Counseling Speech Parents are also invited in to participate in counseling sessions, meetings and workshops. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with: School Uniforms Books, bags and supplies Winter coats Free access to all school trips and functions Waivers for all college applications Help with accessing outside resources for social services (as needed) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. For future openings we will continue the strong hiring and retention practices by: ● Ensuring every teacher is licensed in the content area that he/she teaches. ● Prospective teachers are required to submit resumes, which are then vetted by the school’s hiring committee. The principal, assistant principal, with other department-specific faculty, will conduct an initial interview. A demonstration lesson will follow to determine that incoming teachers are highly qualified. ● Once new teachers are hired they work in conjunction with department members to develop instructional units and assessments for students. ● Offering in-house mentoring to all teachers new to the system ● Offering content area coaching to staff members; coaches are provided by CFN 404 ● Recruiting from programs such as Math for America, NYCDOE Teaching Fellows Program ● All of our staff members are continually offered multiple opportunities to attend staff development ● Teachers and counselors are provided with workshops on the graduation requirement in order to better prepare the students in their classes as well as their mentees. ● Teachers and staff attend Institute for Student Achievement’s (ISA) Summer Institute for professional development in all areas of practice and to learn best practices from other ISA schools 2018-19 CEP 35  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Ongoing Professional Learning Team Structures Weekly Whole Staff Learning Sessions The staff at BILA meet every Wednesday from 12:00 pm-2:15:00 pm for whole staff professional development sessions. We hold fast to the belief that the whole pedagogical staff we must get together at least one a week for learning and to address school issues that may arise. Guidance counselors and paraprofessionals also attend these meetings. Differentiated Professional Learning Sessions These sessions are led by peer collaborative teachers (teacher leaders): These teachers have time built in their schedules that allow them time to visit classrooms, meet individually with teachers who need extra support, work on department data. **All Peer Collaborative teachers are members of the cabinet and professional development team. We meet weekly to determine the needs of teachers and students, make decisions about school structure, and evaluate what is or is not working in the school. Peer collaborative teachers are also grade team leaders. ** Grade Team Meetings Grade team meetings take place twice a month on Wednesdays from 12:00-1:30 pm. Our grade teams are our inquiry teams. In these meetings teachers develop intervention plans and monitor student learning and development for groups of students in cycles. Administrators monitor the outcomes of these meetings via minutes and or artifacts that are emailed immediately after the meeting. Or, they sit in on meetings whenever possible. Common Planning Sessions Sessions are held twice a week during the school day and are akin to department meetings. Teachers’ schedules are created with common planning in mind because we think this collaboration is fundamental to teacher development, whole-school structure, and continuity and consistency across grades. Teachers meet and discuss the needs of their specific department and students. They create common assessments, assignments, and curriculum. Administrators monitor the outcomes of these meetings via minutes and or artifacts that are emailed immediately after the meeting. Or, they sit in on meetings whenever possible. Inter-visitation Inter-visitation takes place for several reasons at BILA: ● New teachers have scheduled inter-visitation times for their learning purposes. The principal and assistant principal determine which teachers visit which classrooms initially. Later in the semester teachers decide who they want to visit but must fill out the inter-visitation template we provide. ● Coordinators visit with the intention of supporting and developing struggling teachers (usually at the suggestion of the principal or assistant principal). Or, they may visit to see how a specific pedagogical strategy is working at the request of a teacher. ● Teachers may decide to do inter-visitation on their own as determined by their individual needs Peer Mentoring 2018-19 CEP 36  Experienced teachers meet weekly with first-year teachers to support growth and development. External Professional Learning Sessions All pedagogues are sent to external learning professional sessions provided by the NYCDOE, College for Every Student (CFES), College Board, and other organizations whenever possible during the school year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and administrators meet to plan all aspects of instruction, including assessments in common planning sessions and weekly professional development sessions. Topics covered in professional development around assessments include creating rubrics, designing performance assessment tests and activities, deconstructing state and local assessments. Data is evaluated on a six-week cycle and instructional adjustments are made based on that data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 37  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 269,622.00 0 0 0 2,120,898.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 38   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 42  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts Borough Brooklyn School Number 745 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ann-Marie Henry-Stephens Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elyse English Teacher/Subject Area Brittany Hart Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Graham Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Cicily Humes-James Coach NA School Counselor Shannon Tyler-Garces Parent Morisa Sampson Parent Coordinator Ramona Kearns Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) Bergelette Ologan, Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 261 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.43%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Data from our intake process, SIFE interview tool, and early diagnostic assesments that aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards show that our students enter our program with a wide variety of prior schooling, academic skills, and literacy skills (in both English and their native languages). These data provide teachers with the information they need to properly differentiate their content area, inquiry-based curricula. In addition to teacher created assessments, every year, students take the level set from Achieve 3000 to determine intiial English Reading levels. The results of the Achieve 3000 level indicate that approximately 80% of our students enter our school with a readlng level at or below 6th grade. SIFE students show levels well below 4th grade. As a result, the school coninues to place a great emphasis to teach reading in our differentiated school-wide reading program and in supporting reading and literacy strategies in all content areas in all grades. 9 th and 10 th grade students get extra literacy classes to help develop their reading and writing skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 48  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL programs is determined by analyzing course pass rates, Regents pass rates and promotion rates. These results are consistently reviewed at grade level teams, departments and school wide levels to better determine the effectiveness of school programming. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across all grades on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL indicate that at least 85% opf our students enter our school at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency in all areas. Data indicates that because of our heavy emphasis on literacy skills across content areas, students show growth in reading, writing, lisitening, and speaking rather quickly. Most students test at Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels by the end of10th grade. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have 60-minute block programming for all of our students. All of our 9th grade ELLs are in the one integrated class and they move from class to class in that same block all day. This structure is the same at the10th grade and the 11 th grade level. This allows us to push in extra instructional support (ESL teacher and SpEd teacher) to those classs when needed. Classes are heterogeneous and instruction is in English with native language supports for vocabulary, dictionairies, glossaries and choice of translated reading materia, at timesl. We also make an effort to develop language by providing instructions in writing as well as orally with additional visual enhancements where possible. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 49  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students get 3 60-minute periods of integrated ESL/ELA and 3 60-minute periods of Literacy instruction Transitioning and Expanding students get 3-60 minute periods of ELA Instruction in an integrated setting  Commanding students get 3-60 minute periods of ELA Instruction as do all general education students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered primarily in English (except in foreign language courses). BILA is an inquiry school. At the BILA, rigorous work involves addressing the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards and embedding our school’s Habits of Mind in every lesson and activity so that our students graduate with strong foundational skills for college and career readiness. Our custom unit and lesson plan templates require that teachers not only identify the standards they are addressing, but align learning goals, activities and assessment to those standards. Within our unit and lesson plans, teachers make modifications for different students/ learners so that students have access and modified entry points to ensure academic success for all. ELLs and SpEds are given extra support to ensure they can access all content and fully participate in the lessons. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We continue to check student progress throughout the year to determine what additional supports including native language is needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. The LAP team identifies and facilitates interventions for students identified as having low native language literacy and low numeracy. Such interventions include placement in the freestanding ESL class, providing native language tutoring and content specific materials and/or after-school enrichment tutoring. We also offer referrals to outside organizations that provide additional ESL support. B. Our newcomer are placed in an English/ESL class with a heavy focus on explicit instruction of reading and writing strategies, extensive scaffolding of projects and major assignments, and differentiation of reading and homework assignments based on language ability. Additionally, our newcomer ELL has been provided with additional resources such as Achieve 3000 to target basic English skills. C. We do not have any developing ELLs. Current data indicates that all of our ELLs will graduate in 4 years. However, if any students become developing ELLs we will offer academic intervention across all content areas. The school has adopted uniform reading and writing strategies across English, Social Studies, Math and Science classes. The consistency and repetition of these strategies in all classes supports continued development of reading comprehension, vocabulary development, and structured writing skills. Vocabulary development is a heavy focus amongs this subgroup because academic vocabulary aids in students' comprehension in class as well as their ability to express themselves in speaking and writing. As such, all content teachers explicitly teach content vocabulary. D. The same strategies that apply to developing ELLs will be used to help long-term ELLs. The school only recently got a long-term ELL from another school site and is giving that student the academic intreventions services she needs. E. Former ELLs, on a case by case basis, can continue to be programmed in ELL classes after testing out. For those who continue to require additional support in reading and writing in specific content areas, they may be programmed in the ELL block for those content areas, and programmed for mainstream blocks in other content areas. Lunchtime and after school tutoring is provided to former ELLs, with a specific focus on supporting them with writing 2018-19 CEP 50  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We focus on problem solving and approaches that force students to develop strategies to getting "unstuck". We develop curriculum using grade-level texts as well as online programs including IXL Math and Achieve 3000 to accelerate languageand numeracy development. All staff, including ESL and Special Education teachers, have received training in best practices for co-teaching, Universal Design for Learning, and Understanding by Design. Use of UDL strategies ensures that there are strategic entrypoints in each lesson for each learner. UDL is helpful in breaking down differentiated units into lesson plans that provide entrypoints for all learners. A variety of grade level materials are incorporated into unit and lesson design to provide appropriate supports for ELL SWDs: reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our programming and scheduling maximizes instructional and enrichment time for students. All SWD, including ELLs with SWD, are in ICT settings for all core content area classes, Math, English, Social Studies and Science across all grades. Curricular flexibility to support language and academic development is a schoolwide goal that is being addressed with the use of co-teaching best practices and implementation of UDL in unit and lesson planning. Instructional flexibility is providing through our ICT and push-in/pull-out models of support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive targeted ELA and Math interventions through weekly assignments on Achieve 3000 and IXL Math, adaptive online programs that provide specific skill reinforcement. Both programs provide teachers with data that is used to design classroom instruction to address identified needs in ELA and Math. Additionally, our school's targeted interventions stem from the schoolwide adoption of Universal Design for Learning and Understanding by Design. As UDL is a framework that supports teachers in unit design that incorporates learning activities and assessments for all individuals and groups, including ELLs, teachers are able to break down differentiated units into lesson plans that provide entrypoints for all learners. A variety of grade level materials are incorporated into unit and lesson design to provide appropriate supports for ELLs: reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. In addition, ELLs receive intervention services as outlined in the school's CEP Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The ESL teacher will be programmed to support ELLs in as many classes as possible and teachers who are bi-lingual will be used to team teach with content area teachers in order to offer extra support for ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all of the programs the school offers to other students. We provide after-school tutoring in Math, ELA, Social Studies and Science on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays and Fridays from 3:00-:5.00 p.m. We also offer online literacy and numeracy programs to all of our students and computers are made available to them during classes and after school everyday from 3:00-5:00 pm to complete assignments. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 51  ELLs in our school community have a host of instructional resources available to them. We are an Izone school so ELLS, just like evey other student, have access to computers (one to one), iPads and online reading and writing programs that they can use in school and at home. All of our classroom are equipped with SmartBoards. We have bi-language dictionaries, glossaries, texts and computer software programs such as Achieve 3000, IXL Math and Castle Learning, Brainpop. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have an ESL teacher and a foreign langauge teacher fluent in Spanish and French. However, we work with our students to determine how to best meet the student's language needs including providing native language support if necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged students are available to our ELL students at the appropriate grade level. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs in our school community have a host of instructional resources available to them. We are an Izone school so ELLS, just like evey other student, have access to computers (one to one), iPads and online reading and writing programs that they can use in school and at home. All of our classroom are equipped with SmartBoards. We have bi-language dictionaries, glossaries, texts and computer software programs such as Achieve 3000, IXL Math and Castle Learning, Brainpop. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a Summer Bridge program for all incoming 9th graders to administer English and Math diagnostics as well as introduce them to our school and its philosophy. Adminstrators, teachers, guidance counselors and the parent coordinator are involevd with this program. Additionally we have an Advisory program which matches a small group of students with a teacher who monitors academic progress and social/emotional development throughout the student's high school tenure. Lastly, our new students are matched to a peer mentor from an upper grade to help with the transition to high school.Students who enter throughout the year are assigned advisories and native language buddies and are placed in classes with native language support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? French and Spanish are offered to all students 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA 2018-19 CEP 52  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Ongoing Professional Learning Structures at BILA to support ELLs: Weekly Whole Staff Learning Sessions The staff at BILA meet every Wednesday from 3:00-5:00 pm for whole staff professional development sessions. We hold fast to the belief that the whole pedagogical staff we must get together at least one a week for learning and to address school issues that may arise. Guidance counselors and the paraprofessional also attend these meeting. At these sessions, staff is informed about rules and guidelines pertaining to ELL instruction, support, laws, etc. Grade Team Meetings 9th, 10th and 11th grade team meetings take place twice a month on Wednesdays from 1:30-3:00 pm. Our grade teams are like inquiry teams. In these meetings teachers develop intervention plans and monitor individual student learning and development over a period of time. Teachers will look at student work, progress reports and other data to determine how to support students for success. Common Planning Sessions Sessions are held twice a week during the school day and are akin to department meetings. Teachers’ schedules are created with common planning in mind because we think this collaboration is fundamental to teacher development, whole-school structure, and continuity and consistency across grades. Teachers meet and discuss the needs of their specific department and students within their content areas. They create common assessments, assignments, and curriculum and intervention plans to address students' needs. Conferences Faculty and staff attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas QTEL/OELL trainings – Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other OELL offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to help students transition from middle to high schol we offer an Advisory program to all of our students. Advisories meet 4 times a week for qucik check-ins and once a week for an extended 2-hour session. In our Advisory program, no more than12 students are matched to a faculty member throughout the 4 years of high school. Through Advisory, teachers and students build relationships, conference regularly on academics and serve as a main line for communication with the homes to discuss academics, attendance, college awareness, and social-emotional growth. Students have confidence that there is a teacher available to communicate with rest of teachers and family, arrange conferences and tutoring sessions, come up with strategies for success in areas of homework, study skills, self advocacy, etc. These advisors walk their advisees through the tough transition from middle school to high school and make sure they do not fall behind as they work on their skills needed for high school success and college readiness. Through Advisory, students also receive weekly progress reports. The professional development program described in #1 above provides year-long, on-going professional development for all members of the faculty. Even if teachers participate only in the in-school professional development – the bare minimum for our teachers – they would be participating in a minimum of 144 hours of professional development a year. In addition, our school participates in professional development organized by Internationals the NYCDOE, including intervisitations, summer and Chancellor's professional development days, and a variety of inter-school project-based learning opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 53  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school will support parents and families by providing materials, training, and strategies to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology. During Curriculum Night in September and Febraurywe review programs such Achieve 3000, IXL Math, transcripts, progres reports, graduation requirements, etc with parents. Starting in October and continuing throughout the year as needed, the guidance counselors will create a schedule to meet and discuss all relevant information with parents of ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our lines of communication with our families are very open and transparent. We call our parents/families regularly to inform them of school events, academic progress, attendance and tardiness. We encourage parent volunteers as well as active participation in our PTA to better suppor the school and to learn about important school information. We also email our families regularly with school annoucements and information that pertains to their child personally. All email accounts for our faculty are made public to the families and we anticpate and encourage communication with the homes as often as needed. Parents can interact with the school and get information from a variety of other platforms: Jupiter Grades, the school's website: bilanyc.net, School Messenger, and social media. We also make our information available for families in a variety languages in the need presents itself. We utilize translation services for phone calls and also for face to face meetings. Since we speak with parents regularly, we ask parents/families what supports we can provide them. We believe that through frequent communication, we can touch upon the many issues that parents would like addressed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ann-marie Henry-stephens, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Institute Liberal Art School DBN: 17K745 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Ann-Marie Henry-Stephens Principal Cicily Humes-James Assistant Principal Ramona Kearns Parent Coordinator Elyse English ENL/Bilingual Teacher Morisa Sampson Parent Brittany Hart/French Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Graham/SpEd Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Shannon Tyler-Garces School Counselor Michael Prayor Sourette Fougere NA NA Na Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K745 School Name: BROOKLYN INSTITUTE FOR LIBERAL ARTS Superintendent: MICHAEL PRAYOR The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cicily Humes-James Assistant Principal Anna Maria Charalambous ESL Teacher No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preferences of the parent community primarily based on information provided by parents on the home language identification survey (which is done during intake), and through conversations with parents. We also use results of surveys provided by the PTA, after school and orientation sessions. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC FRENCH FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE ITALIAN NAHUATL ENGLISH SPANISH TWI 3 6 1 32 1 1 481 28 1 0.54 1.08 0.18 5.78 0.18 0.18 86.82 5.05 0.18 3 6 3 32 1 1 478 29 1 0.54 1.08 0.54 5.78 0.18 0.18 86.28 5.23 0.18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families 1. Family Handbook June 17, 2017 and an ongoing basis as parents come in to register students over the summer and in the fall 2. School Calendar of Activities In September 2017 3. PTA Calendar 4. SLT Calendar At the first PTA Meeting and Curriculum Night on September 28, 2017. At the first SLT meeting of the 2017-2018 school year--September 14, 2017 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Using DOE translation services Using DOE translation services Using DOE translation services Using DOE translation services 5. Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Weekly during the first 3 weeks of October 2017. Using DOE translation services 6. After-School Program Calender September 18, 2017 7. Calendar of New York State test dates In October 26 & 27, 2017 during Parent-Teacher Conferences Using DOE translation services Using DOE translation services 8. Class Contracts On the first 2 days of classes--September 7 & 8, 2017 Using school staff who are bilingual 2018-19 CEP 58  9. NYCDOE Backpack Letters ( immunization, vision screening, etc.) On an ongoing basis during the school year Translated versions of these letters are usually provided by Central. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Using bilingual school staff members and parents Using school Staff, if needed 1. PTA Meetings 2. SLT Meetings September 28, 2017 October 26, 2017 November 18, 2017 December 9, 2017 January 13, 2018 February 10, 2018 March 10, 2018 April 14, 2018 May 12, 2018 June 2, 2018 September 14, 2017 October 19, 2017 November 16, 2017 December 14, 2017 January 18, 2018 February 15, 2018 March 22, 2018 April 26, 2018 May 17, 2018 June 16, 2018 3. Parent-Teacher Conferences Oct. 26 & 27, 2017 Using school staff and DOE phone translation services. 2018-19 CEP 59  March 15 & 16, 2018 4. Curriculum Night Sept. 28, 2017 Using school staff 5. Annual ELL Parent Meeting Oct. 28, 2017 Using school staff and DOE phone translation services. 6. Parent meetings based on individuals needs or as issues arise On an ongoing basis as needed Using school staff 7. IEP Meetings As needed throughout the school year Using school staff 8. Guidance Interventions or College Preparedness Sessions On an ongoing basis as needed Using school staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Bilingual school staff members make phone calls when needed. The school also uses School Messenger which allows us to send messages in as many languages as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School staff will be notified during professional development sessions in October 2017. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Brooklyn Institute for Liberal Arts takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a covered language and those who require language assistance services receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. The Parent Coordinator and guidance counselors hold an orientation session for new parents as they enroll their students in the school which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these 2018-19 CEP 60  meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at the parent teacher conferences held in the fall and in the spring. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys Phone Calls to parents We have had no complaints from parents so we continue to provide services as we have been doing in the past. 2018-19 CEP 61 
