2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K748 School Name: P.S. 748 BROOKLYN SCHOOL FOR GLOBAL SCHOLARS Principal: URSULA ANNIO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Brooklyn School for Global Scholars 332000010748 PK-5 1664 Benson Avenue 718-382-3130 Phone Number: Jennifer Guido School Number (DBN): 20K748 718-382-3140 Fax: JGuido2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Ursula Annio Siobhan Lorina Dawn Vega Siobhan Lorina n/a n/a n/a n/a School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street KCostantino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South MauriciereDe Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street MDeGovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-834-7218 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Katherine Cheregotis Rosemarie DiVirgilio Lisa Domingo Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Ursula Annio Siobhan Lorina Dawn Vega DawnVega n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  AnnapurnaSinha FatinMohammedAli Christine Intervallo David Guilifu n/a n/a n/a n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that the success of each child is dependent upon a strong partnership with parents. We are committed to communicating our school goals to parents and guiding them in understanding the expectations at each grade level and how they can support their children in achieving the standards. 2018-19 CEP 9  The vision for The Brooklyn School for Global Scholars embraces the concept of educating the whole child and nurturing global citizens. We believe in building a strong connection to the community, thereby preparing students for college and career. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school first opened its doors in September 2010, simultaneously with the adoption of the CCLS. We, as the founding educators of our school, decided to implement the CCLS completely. We began our study of the CCLS and began designing our own curriculum that was both interdisciplinary, standards based and rigorous. Our curriculum is a living, breathing curriculum that has been developed, revised, and refined each year to meet the needs of our changing population. We have shifted our curriculum from curriculum maps using ATLAS system to curriculum maps guided by essential questions, now available on a Wiki space. We foster a collaborative environment for both teachers and students. Our grade/content teams have common planning time as well as grade level inquiry meetings on Monday afternoons. We continue to revisit how to build independence and develop a repertoire of problem solving strategies in our students that can be applied across the curriculum and result in an ability to clearly communicate understanding . We have a shared belief of how children learn best which is through an interdisciplinary approach to learning that results in student independence. Our Student Government coordinates community outreach projects such as the Food Drive, the Coat Drive, the Souper Bowl, VIP Readers and Relay for Life. In addition, each grade hosts a fundraiser for a specific cause to give back to the community such as the Special Olympics, Stomp out Bullying as well as local charitable organizations. Enriching the curriculum through residencies and partnerships with community based organization as well as the School Enrichment Model truly embodies the original proposal for our school. We are committed with engaging students in enrichment activities that will move our high performing students to Level 4’s, while providing our students approaching the standards including our ENL students and students with Special Needs exposure to different topics, curricula, approaches and personnel that is interest based and tied to the curriculum. After two years as an application school, due to the overcrowding in District 20, we became a zoned school changing the demographics from a majority of gifted & talented students to an increased number of ENL and Special Needs students. It has been an empowering experience to build a school from the bottom up and given the opportunity to self-select the educators that represent our school’s vision and mission. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In the 2018-2019 school year, we have an ICT class on each grade from Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. These special needs students are mainly learning disabled. A few students are emotionally disturbed and require a crisis paraprofessional. There are 9 students being serviced in our Kindergarten ICT, 12 students in Grade 1 ICT, 10 students in Grade 2 ICT, 8 students in Grade 3 ICT, 12 student in Grade 4 ICT and 12 students in Grade 5 ICT. In the 2018-2019 school year, we have approximately 123 ENL students in Grades K-5. 39% of those students are at the Commanding Level, 36% are at the Expanding Level, 8% are at the Transitioning Level, 5% are at the Emerging Level and 8% are at the Entering Level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instruction focus this year continues to build on that of previous years in an effort to continue to build capacity and deepen our understanding of the learning process in order to maximize student achievement and progress. Based on our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, PS 748 has exceeded the target in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Strong Family-Community Ties and Supportive Environment. We have meet our target for Effective Leadership, and Trust. Although we have exceeded our target and met our goal from last year in Strong Family-Community Ties, we 2018-19 CEP 10  will continue to focus on this area during the 2018-2019 school year. Although we do have many dual income working families, we have planned for an increase in daytime events such as pajama literacy day, our science fair, career week and our annual International day. In addition, we are offering ENL classes for adults as well as parent volunteer opportunities in the classroom. Each grade will be hosting a monthly parent academy and we are planning to have monthly open house opportunities for parents to visit classrooms during the day. Our focus will be on improving the area of Effective School Leadership.t. The main area in Effective School Leadership that received a low positive percentage with an 85% was Teacher Influence. We plan to increase the these areas by offering more opportunities for teachers to provide professional development for their colleagues, as well as share best practices with the school community. In addition, many of our teachers are attending Ruler training as part of our Emotional Intelligence initiative at Yale University and will turn-key that training to the greater staff. We have included a positive "Shout Out" bulletin board that allows staff members to leave a compliment for a deserving staff member and have provided staff members the opportunity to join more committees within the school building. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K748 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 548 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 65.1% % Reduced Lunch 15.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 28.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 30.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 29% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 64.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 35 35 21 95.9% 8.0% 13.3% 0.4% 39.4% 1.3% 2 0% 7.6 78.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since we opened the doors in 2010, our population has shifted from predominately gifted students and a school of choice to now a zoned school with only one fifth grade gifted and talented class. We are a 2017 Blue Ribbon Schools of Excellence recipient for High Performance. We write our own curriculum and practice project based learning. We are also implementing an Emotional Intelligence initiative out of Yale University. Teachers who are being trained directly from Yale will turn key the professional development to their colleagues to be implemented to our students. Based on our 2018 NYS ELA scores, out of 274 students tested, 64%of all students reached proficiency in Grades 3-5. Of the 32 ENL students tested, 13% reached proficiency. There were 10 students who reached a Level 1, 18 students who reached a Level 2 and 3 students who reached a level 3 and 1 student who reached a Level 4. Of the 36 students with disabilities tested, 12 students reached proficiency. there were 8 students who received a Level 1, 16 students who received a Level 2, 10 students who reached a Level 10 and 2 students who reached a Level 4. Based on our 2018 NYS Math scores, out of 273 students tested, 78% of all students reached proficiency with 59% reaching a Level 4. Of the 33 ENL students, 52% reached proficiency. There were 8 students who received a Level 1, 8 students who received a Level 2, 13 students who received a Level 3 and 4 students who received a Level 4. Of the 36 students with disabilities tested, 47% reached proficiency. There were 7 students who reached a Level 1, 12 students who reached a Level 2, 7 students who reached a Level 3 and 10 students who reached a Level 4. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT, out of 76 students tested, 32% reached the Commanding Level. According to the ELL Data Analysis Tool, areas of weakness are in the writing and listening portions of the NYSESLAT. Priority needs include: ● Planning rigorous instruction - Infuse ENL strategies with an emphasis on listening and writing activities integrated into projects. Administer diagnostic assessments with the I-Ready program. Academic Intervention Specialists will target Level 1 and 2 students in Grades K-5. ● Collaboration between ENL teachers, Special Education teachers and General Education Teachers ● Strong Family-Community Ties - workshops for parents, planned school wide events, ENL classes for parents. ● Supportive Environment- opportunities for teachers to engage in professional learning. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our NYS ELA and NYSESLAT scores will increase by 5% as a result of cycles of targeted Academic Intervention Services by our AIS providers for our K-5 Level 1 and 2 students, including our ENL and SWD populations. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through Data Inquiry, our ENL teachers assigned to grade level teacher teams will meet to look at common deficits of our bottom third ENL learners and implement projects and presentations that will focus on deficits based on the NYSESLAT and ELA/Math State scores. Students will be selected based on deficits to participate in the ENL after-school program or ELA/Math after-school tutoring program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Professional Development Team, Teachers, ENL Teachers K-5 Teachers, ENL Teachers September 2018-June 2019 ENL students Grades K-5 Teachers will meet weekly on Monday afternoons. from 2:20-3:00 ENL -December 2018 - May 2019 Tutoring - January 2018 - May 2019 Our Academic Intervention Specialists will focus on I-Ready diagnostics, Reading and Math Levels and those students who performed at Level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA and Math tests to provide cycles of intervention. K-5 ENL students October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, AIS Providers In addition our Title 1 Targeted Assisted teacher will also target children who are Economically Disadvantaged to provide additional ELA and Math intervention. AIS Providers September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 15 All teachers will collaborate and meet regularly during Monday Professional Learning and common preparation periods to plan differentiated, rigorous instructional tasks and modify curriculum maps that support students’ instructional levels with an emphasis on our ENL and SWD population. Our two ENL teachers and our AIS Reading Teacher will be attending the 5 session Train the Trainer sessions on "Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills to Enhance Instruction for Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Learners. English Language classes for parents of our ENL students will be given weekly so that parents will learn English to help support their children. K-5 Teachers, ENL Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, All Teachers 2 ENL Teachers 1 AIS Reading Teacher Parents Teachers will meet weekly on Monday afternoons from 3:00-4:00 10/30/18, 11/27/18, 1/17/18, 2/13/18, 3/13/18 Lucia Medina, Perez, Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP October 2017-June 2018 Weekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Academies will be conducted on Tuesday Parent Engagement time to inform parents of the expectations and standards for the grade. Each grade will plan for a parent workshop once a month from October 2018-June 2019. Teachers on each grade will be responsible for planning these workshops based on needs of the class, Principal and Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will be responsible for sending correspondence to parents and overseeing workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule Adjustments: 2018-19 CEP 16  Departmentalization of core subject areas in Grades 3-5 Common Planning with Grade and Department Enrichment and Academies Human Resources: AIS providers ENL providers Per Session: Teacher and Supervisor per session for Data Team Instructional Resources: Leveled Library (Benchmark, Rigby, Scholastic) IPads RAZZ Kids computer assisted program Reading A-Z Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students with disabilities and ENL students will increase 2 reading levels in Grades K-2 and 1 reading level in grades 3-5 as evidenced by the January TC Assessments and the ENL January Progress Report By February 2018, students with disabilities and ENL students will achieve at least a high level 2 in Math based on teacher created periodic assessments By February 2019, based on the ENL teachers' assessments and observations, we are looking to see students in our bottom third move into the emerging/transitioning range and our expanding children move into our commanding range. Update: Based on the January 2019 Monitoring for Results, 92% of our ENL population in Grades K-2 progressed 2 reading levels and 70% of our special needs students progressed 2 reading levels. Based on I-Ready data and teacher created periodic assessments, 80% of our students achieved a high level 2 in Math. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Monitoring for Results (Math/ELA) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our motto at The Brooklyn School for Global scholars is "learning today, leading tomorrow." By working together with parents and teachers, we ensure that all students can and will become global citizens. With this theme in mind, our goals include increasing student achievement by creating a curriculum based on the Common Core Learning Standards, infusing a social and emotional curriculum through our "Bucket Fillers program" and A.C.E. (Achievement in Civic Excellence), and creating partnerships between the school, home, and community. Our Bucket Fillers program teaches students in grades K-2 to be responsible and respectful when faced with difficult decisions and our A.C.E. awards are given to students in 3-5 who have made notable contributions to their class or community. Recipients of these awards are honored at monthly assemblies and parents and family members are invited to support the students. We also have an active Student Government, where students in grade 5 are given the unique opportunity to coordinate charitable initiatives aimed at supporting our community. The student government also plays a leadership role in PTA functions, parent events, and partnerships with early childhood grades and school initiatives. Last year, our school was recognized for our "Respect for All" activities, lessons, and assemblies that highlighted positive student behavior and promoted acceptance. We have continued with that initiative, planning special events such as our annual International Night and our Parade of Nations where our staff, students and families learn from one another and celebrate each others' differences. As a staff, we had PS 748 spirit shirts made and we wear them to demonstrate our school spirit on special days and at assemblies. We also have school spirit wear for students that they can wear in addition to the dress code. According to our 2017-2018 School Survey Results, only 79% of our teachers felt that children behaved in their classrooms. Priority needs include:  Rigorous curriculum - Integrating RULER strategies into the classroom (mood meter) ● Strong Family-Community Ties - Timely parent meetings/outreach ● Supportive Environment - support by the parent coordinator, Principal and AP during parent meetings, workshops for teachers on speaking with parents, RULER Training ● Effective School Leadership - RULER training for teachers from Yale University's Center for Emotional Intelligence. 2018-19 CEP 19  Trust - Turn Key RULER training Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Supportive Environment score will improve from an 87% to a 90% through school wide incentives and continuing to instill Bucket Filler behavior as well as providing teachers with RULER training from The Center of Emotional Intelligence from Yale University. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Bucket Filler/ACE and classroom behavioral charts and incentives will be visible in every classroom. Special Education students in Grades K-5 Professional development opportunities will be provided during our Monday PD time by internal staff members to turn-key RULER training from the Center of Emotional Intelligence at Yale University so teachers can implement these strategies in their classrooms. Teachers in Grades K-5 Select teachers will attend training at Yale University in October 2018. Other teachers attending in July 2018. Teachers and clusters will utilize the Tuesday Parent Engagement time for contacting parents of students who are disruptive during classroom instruction. Teachers in Grades 3-5 Each grade will conduct monthly Parent Academies for their grade level to educate parents on the current curriculum, skills and strategies needed at that level and how they can support their children/'s social and emotional growth at home. Teachers in Grades K-5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher, Para-professionals, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Para-professionals, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Para-professionals, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Incentives will change every month. September 2018-June 2019 PD will be provided 3 times a year - October, January, March September 2017-June 2018 Weekly October 2017- June 2018 Each grade will conduct a parent workshop once a month. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September - June, parents will be invited to parent academies during Tuesday Parent Engagement times focused on establishing clear expectations for behavior and effective discipline. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be provided with Professional Development in classroom management and RULER strategies during Monday PD hours. Teachers will turn key their TCIS training from last year to assist teachers in de-escalating students who are in crisis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be less then 10 Level 4 behavioral infractions as evidenced by OORS reports. Teachers will be asked to submit monthly BucketFiller and ACE award recipients. Update: Based on last year's data, we had 10 Level 4 infractions by February and currently we have 2 Level 4 infractions this school year. In addition, we have had 0 suspensions and teacher removals. We have also had monthly Bucketfiller and ACE award ceremonies recognizing citizenship and kindness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 MOTP scores, 93% of our teachers were effective or highly effective. Teachers who fall within the developing range will be given a mentor and participate in inter visitation with highly effective teachers. In addition, support will be given to developing teachers through professional learning opportunities. Priority Needs ● Planning rigorous instruction - Opportunities such as common planning time and Monday PD time will be planned to include ways to engage children in learning and planning highly effective lessons. ● Collaboration between Special Education, ENL and General Education Teachers ● Supportive Environment - Plan for Inter-visitation among grades, Teachers will work with the Peer Collaborative Teacher ● Effective School Leadership - An increase in walk-throughs and timely feedback on observations ● Trust - creating an opportunity for teachers to speak to administration regarding planning Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of our teachers will be Effective and Highly Effective in the Danielson Framework based on a school wide plan for frequent cycles of classroom observations and the implementation of grade level and subject area data inquiry teams with a focus on our Special Education students and/or ENL students which will result in improved teacher practice as evidenced by the MOTP scores. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Principal and Assistant Principal will develop a plan to observe teachers at least 4 x per year, according to their observation options, and provide actionable feedback in a timely manner All Teachers Grades K-5 October 2018-May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Feebback will occur within 10 days of observation. Teachers will set 2 goals in September for themselves based on the Danielson Framework (Domains 2 and 3) and it will be revisited in January and June All Teachers Grades K-5 September2018, January 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers June 2018 Meetings with each teacher Teachers will participate in Professional Development based on the Danielson Framework, as well as strategies for ENL students and students with disabilities through Project Based Learning. All Teachers Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal. Teachers Weekly during Monday PD time Teachers will share their highly effective lessons with staff members and inter-visitations will be planned to view ENL strategies and differentiation for students with disabilities. All Teachers Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will have the support of a Peer-Collaborative Teacher who will model and work with teachers to meet their goals. Intervisitation will be planned monthly Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 24  Parent Academies will be given by each grade once a month on Tuesday Parent Engagement time during the months of October 2018- June 2019 to discuss Project Based learning, high expectations and the level of engagement expected by the students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule Adjustments: Departmentalization of core subject areas in Grades 3-5 Common Planning with Grade and Department Human Resources: AIS providers Per Session: Teacher and Supervisor per session for Data Team and planning purposes Instructional Resources: Professional Books and Publications Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, 90% of teachers will be Effective or Highly Effective as measured by the Danielson Framework and implementation of instructional strategies from professional development will be evidenced in informal/formal observations. Update: Based on a February 2019 Advance report, 80% of our teachers are Effective or Highly Effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 25  Danielson Framework, Teacher Goal sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, we received a 92%in the area of Effective School Leadership. An area of strength is that we departmentalize instruction in grades 3-5 based on teacher preference for subject area. Also, teachers in K- 2 are supported by the ENL teachers and Speech teachers so that the varied needs of their students are being met in the classroom. With our increasing special education and ENL population, we are seeing that additional AIS for students in grades 3-5 and professional learning opportunities for the upper grade teachers in special needs and ENL strategies are needed. ● Planning rigorous instruction - Weekly common planning periods for grades and subject area teachers ● Supportive Environment - Planning for inter-visitation between classrooms on each grade, Peer Collaborative Teachers working in classrooms, AIS and Title 1 Targeted Assisted F-status teacher working with specific groups of children in Grades K-5 ● Effective School Leadership - Planning for professional learning opportunities on how to support ENL and SWD in the upper grade classrooms, use of assessments in instruction ● Trust - Professional conversations with administration and AIS teachers about planning Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we would like to increase our score on the NYC School Survey in the area of Effective School Leadership from a 92% to a 95% by providing the necessary supports to teachers, especially in the areas of instructional materials and instructional support in the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage teachers in a professional book club during the Professional Development time set aside on Monday afternoons on topics that provide strategies for Project Based learning, ENL students and students with disabilities. Teachers Grades K-5 November 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, AP (Weekly)Monday afternoons 3:00-4:00 Schedule common planning periods for our ENL teachers, peer collaborative teacher, AIS providers, general education teachers and special education providers to meet and plan for students. Train teachers on the I-Ready reading and math computer program to help monitor student progress. Teachers Grades K-5 Sept, 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, AP Weekly Students, Teachers Grades K-5 October 2018, December 2018, March 2019 Teachers, Principal, AP, Empower teachers who are experts in certain areas to conduct professional development and visit classrooms to provide feedback and coach teachers to improve their practice. Teachers Grades K-5 October 2018-June 2019 Monthly Professional development team, Teachers, Principal, AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Parent Engagement time, parent academies will focus on training parents on the parent component of the I-Ready program and other programs the teachers use in the classrooms such as RAZZ kids three times a year, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 28  Teachers in Grades 3-5 will departmentalize by subject area. Common planning time for teachers by grade and subject. Mainstreaming of students in the self-contained class into general education and gifted and talented education classes. Human Resources - AIS providers and Reading Recovery Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, 100% of K-5 classroom teachers will be using instructional supports purchased by the school this year to aid in the assessment, grouping and identification of deficits of our students in both ELA and Math. Update: 100% of our K-5 classrooms are using I-Ready online assessment system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-ready reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, PS 748 received a score of 94% on Strong Family-Community Ties. Although we received a 98% in outreach to parents, our parent involvement in school yielded a 94%. Although we do have many dual income working families, we have planned for an increase in daytime events such as pajama literacy day, science fair share, career week and our annual International day. We have noticed a decrease in parent attendance in night time events and an increase in attendance during the day. In addition, we are offering ENL classes for adults as well as parent and grandparent volunteer opportunities in the classroom. Each grade will be hosting a monthly parent academy and we are planning to have monthly open house opportunities for parents to visit classrooms during the day. Unfortunately, attendance is very low at these events. Priorities: Strong Family -Community Ties - Increase attendance at family/school events by offering times during the day for parents to attend. Offer more translation services during these events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we would like to increase our Strong Family-Community Ties score on the NYC School Survey from a 94% - 96% by continuing to work on increasing attendance at parent workshops, parent academies and other parent involvement through day time events, as well as plan for community based organizations to provide workshops/translations for parents at these events. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Learning Leaders - PS 748 is committed to train parents to provide individualized instructional support and other school-based support to students in our school. Parents Grades K-5 January 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP Training for parents during the month of January. Parents working with children weekly. ENL Classes for Adults - PS 748 will continue to provide ENL classes to parents of students in our school. Parents Grades K-5 November 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP A needs assessment will be given to parents to determine what type of workshops and events they would like to attend and their availability. Parents Grades K-5 Weekly classes November2018, January 2019-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP Our Parent Coordinator will reach out to community based organizations to provide workshops that are of interest to our parents including bullying, health care, parenting, etc. Parents Grades K-5 November, 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP Monthly meetings will be held during the school day on these topics. Teachers will continue to plan and conduct parent academies based on curriculum and instruction during the Tuesday parent involvement time. Parents Grades K-5 November 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, AP, Teachers Each grade will conduct one parent academy a month that is presented during Tuesday Parent 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Enagament time. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional resources - ENL books for parents, learning leader training materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will expect 30% attendance rate by each grade as evidenced by attendance sheets from classroom and school wide events. Update: We have seen approximately a 25% increase in attendance rates as evidenced by attendance sheets from classroom events and school wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign In sheets, parent feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher’s College Assessment – Reading Level, Teacher Observations, NYS ELA Exam Teacher Made Math Exams, Teacher Observations, NYS Math Exam Teacher feedback, unit exams Teacher feedback, unit exams Teacher Observations, Parent Requests Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Instruction During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Word Study, Reading Recovery, Orton Gillingham, Test Sophistication Word Problems, Multi-Step Problems, Fact Drills Small Group Instruction During the school day concept review, repeated readings concept review, repeated readings Counseling, Peer Mediation small group instruction small group instruction Small Group, One to One Instruction During the school day During the school day During the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are currently no students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers who are apply to teach at PS 748 are interviewed by the Principal and Assistant Principal and then are asked to do a demonstration lesson in the grade they are applying for. Once hired, teachers are placed in a grade that they are licensed for and have experience in. They are given a survey of what types of professional development opportunities they are interested in and have an initial planning meeting with an administrator to set professional goals. From the survey, professional development is planned for our Monday PD times and is differentiated based on teacher need and experience. Our arts teachers attend Monday Arts training outside of the building, our new teachers are provided with PD specific to their needs and our veteran teachers either conduct PD or will take part in a professional book club to further their learning. In addition, many of our teachers have and will be attending RULER training from The Center of Emotional Intelligence at Yale University. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are provided with a survey at the beginning of the year and then again in January to see what types of professional development opportunities our teachers are interested in. We differentiate professional development based on subject area, need and level of experience and knowledge about a specific topic. Our Monday PD afternoons consist of professional book clubs, data inquiry and turn-key training by staff member who have attended conferences outside of the school (i.e. RULER traing from The Center of Emotional Intelligence at Yale University). Teacher observations also guide what type of professional development is needed. Our data inquiry and professional book clubs are centered around helping students who are falling below to meet the standards. Our curriculum maps reflect the research that has been studied by including reading and math strategies that have proves successful with children. Paraprofessionals also take part in this training and do assist all children during the school day in their daily class work. Our administration is in the process of also being RULER trained through Yale University. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 36  Our TA program resources will include an F-Status teacher (3 days a week) who is fully funded and will service our Title 1 children in reading. Her program will include the purchase of leveled books, guided reading books and books that the children can take home and share with their families. Supplies such as backpacks, notebooks and regular school supplies will also be provided for these children. Our Academic Intervention Specialists in both reading and math are also partially funded through Title 1 and will also be providing support in Reading and Math. Parent programs will also be planned during the school day such as Adult ENL classes, citizenship classes and parenting workshops. In addition, Parent-Child Workshops to take place on Saturdays are also planned throughout the year which include fun and educational experiences in Science, Literacy and STEAM. Materials will be purchased for this program and per-session will be provided for teachers who work this program. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). In an effort to minimize removing children from the regular classrooms, our F-Status and other AIS personnel will be pushing into classrooms to provide instruction to the Title 1 students throughout the week. All children will have access to our curriculum maps including participating in our School Wide Enrichment program. All teachers practice project based learning and provide small group instruction based on students' assessments and needs. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 37  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 38   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 748, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 748 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 748 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Upon becoming a zoned school approximately 8 years ago, our school community has become diverse with students where English is not their native language. These students are eligible to receive mandated second language services. In addition to their mandated service, P.S. 748 will host an ENL after school program. The purpose of the after school program is to provide ENL children with the opportunity to gain higher academic and social English language through the four modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing. From kindergarten to fifth grade, Title III will be funding an after school program including class materials and parent support. The program will contain student language levels as follows: approximately 11 students at the entering level, 07 students at the emerging level, 10 students at the transitioning level and 46 students at the expanding level. This program will be servicing approximately 75 ELLs based on the estimated participation. The program will be held two days a week (Wednesday and Thursday) from 2:30 pm – 3:45 pm. This program will run from January 9, 2019 to April 18, 2019, meeting for approximately 27 sessions. Our focus is to ensure that all students are given the individual time necessary to successfully achieve stronger social skills in the English language. To achieve our goal, two content area teachers will team teach with an ENL teacher. The ENL teacher will guide the content area teachers to best facilitate a lesson that meets the needs of the intended group. The teachers participating in this after school program are Lisa Domingo (ENL teacher), Cathy Carbonaro (ENL teacher), Maria Vourderis and Lauren Chao. Ms. Vourderis and Ms. Chao are expert ELA teachers at P.S. 748 and will offer extra assistance in reading/writing strategies. Ms. L. Domingo will work closely to provide the students and teachers with the necessary materials and information to successfully achieve our goal. Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro will prioritize their time between ENL groups by team teaching with both teachers. The teachers will utilize this after school program time to increase the ENL students’ grades and accelerate progress. Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro will team teach and work in an integrated model for the allotted afterschool time. All teachers will be responsible to indicate student attendance on a provided attendance sheet and monitor student growth using goal sheets. Attendance and goal sheets will be monitored by Ms. L. Domingo over the course of the after school time. This approach will enable teachers to collaborate and encourage students to work independently to complete their work. Using DATA from NYSESLAT scores and students individual work, ELLs will be involved in social activities, such as Readers’ Theatre, reading/writing activities, such as poetry and listening activities, such as read alouds. Using all modalities and the NYSESLAT results, students will be able to grow individually based on their needs. Using goal sheets, students and teachers can also monitor their growth during after school time. Parents will be notified on their childs’ growth using the Translation Interpretation Unit, as well as translators as per their availability. All teachers will be using the English language in all instruction. The teachers and students will be using SMART Board technology, IPADs as needed and Readers Theater Books/Poetry. The Readers Theatre Books/Poetry offers students the opportunity to build background knowledge, learn content and academic vocabulary, assist teachers in scaffolding the instruction to meet the needs of ELLs and support ELLs in reading comprehension. The Literacy development and grade-level content facilitates the development of 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information academic language and vocabulary, nonfiction reading skills and strategies. These materials will supplement the students everyday learning to meet their needs and achieve our school goal. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 748 is a school of strong team collaboration. Professional development is offered and available to all teachers, including those who are not working the after school program who service ENL children. Our purpose for this after school program is to provide ENL children with the opportunity to gain higher academic and social English through the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Our focus is to ensure that all students are given the individual time necessary to successfully achieve stronger social skills in the English language. The teachers will be given professional learning once a month, from October to May, during Monday's Professional Development time and allotted times that are to be determined. On the first and last Monday in October and May, teachers will collaborate and discuss the goals of the program, ideas to implement, and student progress. In alternate months, November, December, January, February, March and April, teachers will discuss specific topics such as scaffolding, differentiation, literacy, vocabulary building, the four hallmarks of advanced literacy, mindfulness and language development. Over the course of eight months, there will be approximately 26 ENL focused PD’s available for all teachers. The teachers will have the opportunity to express their ideas and learn about available resources that are necessary for ELL students. At no cost to Title III, it is our goal as teachers to collaborate together in order to create a homogeneous learning environment. As a school, we host a teacher’s professional book club that allows educators to gain additional information specifically in terms of teaching ELLs. Every other week, teachers gather to discuss their findings and book reflections. Currently, the books in discussion are titled, Mindsets & Moves by Gravity Goldberg and Cultivating Knowledge, Building Language by Nonie K. Lesaux and Julie Russ Harris. Our students at P.S 748 require additional support in reading, writing and listening/speaking. Professional developments will be geared towards the needs and success of the students’ individual progress. In collaboration with the administration to support ELLs, Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro will support the teachers in receiving the appropriate professional learning opportunities to support ELLs. To date, two classroom teachers, Mrs. Anna Doktor and Ms. Rosemarie DiVirgilio, have given a workshop on “supporting the ELLs in the mainstream classroom.” Additionally, Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro have turnkeyed information from various professional developments, including but not limited to, language objectives, co- teaching strategies and helpful ELL resources. All teachers were given helpful strategies and information pertaining to ELL students. Ms. L. Domingo attends and turnkeys many PD’s and ensures teachers at P.S. 748 are up to date with any changes and news concerning ELLs. Many PD’s are conducted through the Brooklyn South ELL team. In relation to Title III, teachers involved are given PD’s prior to and during the afterschool to better help the ELLs in their learning. Meeting once a month, teachers will discuss student progress, growth and resources used. In addition to teacher led professional learning opportunities, P.S. 748 has professional development workshops, which are scheduled in the schools professional development plan, to support ELLs 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development in the classrooms. Apart from the in house professional learning, Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro continue to attend workshops such as Language Series 2018 and Advanced Literacy Progressions. Currently, Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro have attended and have scheduled ENL PD’s given through Brooklyn South team. With these workshops, Ms. L. Domingo and Ms. Carbonaro will continue to turnkey new and helpful information in order to provide optimal student success. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 748 stands in the heart of Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. The community surrounding P.S. 748 is filled with students, parents and community helpers. Hoping to achieve our goal of providing ENL children with the opportunity to gain higher academic and social English through the four modalities, listening, speaking, reading, and writing, our focus is to ensure that all students are given the individual time necessary to successfully achieve stronger social skills in the English language. Notices will be sent home to the parents of ELLs, giving them the option for their child to attend the after school program. Upon their choice, the child(ren) will be given supplemental support in the four major ENL components. P.S. 748 will stay connected with parents periodically. The first and last month (January and April), parents will be invited to an in house meeting. In January, parents will be introduced to the program, its goals and objective. In April, the parents will be informed of student progress and strategies that go beyond school for the summer. The alternate months (February and March), there will be a monthly newsletter. This newsletter will indicate the program and school updates on progress or development. Parents will have four sessions and newsletters, written in their preferred language, to stay up to date in our program. During our Tuesday Parent Engagement time, P.S. 748 teachers meet with parents to encourage homework assistance. In addition to offering parent resources and information, P.S. 748 stays connected to parents using monthly goals. The goals are sent out to parents to create awareness of their child’s individual progress. Using goals, parents are able to assist their child(ren) with the necessary support to succeed in their education. P.S. 748 plans to keep parents of ELLs informed by using flyers, phone calls, emails, and notices in both English and their preferred language. All resources to contact parents will be available in both, their home language and English. The parents will be informed of any changes and student progress through parent meetings, phone calls, or notices home. Ms. L. Domingo has created a wonderful relationship with all ELL parents. Her email and school phone number are available for all questions or concerns. Many parents of ELLs volunteer as translators for others who are unfamiliar with the English language. At no cost to Title III, P.S. 748 will utilize the Office of Translators in case of translation needs. Ms. Salerno, the parent coordinator, has additional parent volunteers available to assist with meetings, phone calls, and notice scribing if necessary. At no cost to Title III, our parent coordinator, Ms. Salerno, currently hosts an adult ENL class for parents to learn English. The adult ENL class occurs on Mondays from 8:30- 9:30 AM. P.S. 748 has created the adult program to meet simultaneously as the school day begins encouraging parents to attend classes. There are approximately 14 sessions held beginning January 9th and ending April 29th. Parent volunteers assist Ms. Salerno with the adult ENL classes for translation 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and education reasons. Ms. Salerno keeps attendance records, invitations in parents preferred languages and agendas. The ENL adult classes are based on the needs of the parents attending. Many parents are eager to learn basic writing skills, reading skills, and oral language. Beyond adult ENL classes, at no cost to Title III, P.S. 748 hosts Saturday institutions that are geared to involve all community family members with STEM projects. The Saturday programs have been successful in engaging families to come to our school and enjoy learning with their child(ren) through hands on learning approaches. Together, we hope to achieve our goal and create a successful future. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 73% $7,456.05  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 14% $1382.47 and curriculum development contracts. 14% $1382.47 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This amount will be geared towards our per session professional salaries. From the months of January to April, two days a week (Wednesday, and Thursday) from 2:30- 3:45 pm. Meeting approximately 27 sessions. 4 teachers x 27 sessions x 2.5 hours x $55.23 = $7,456.05. This amount will be geared towards future Professional Development opportunities and Professional Vendors through out the year. Included in this cost are the books for professional learning. Approximately $30 per book, amongst 35 teachers for book club purposes. The remainder will be intended for future sources. This amount will be geared towards necessary materials needed and the Readers Theater Books/Poetry. This purchase will be made mainly through Scholastic in which we are still approximating costs. This amount includes the expected fees. All levels and grades will be included in this cost, as well as multiples of each title. All students will be able to participate using their own 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. copy. This program will be used as an asset to achieving our goal. The sets range from $15.00 to $60.00 per set. Titles include, but are not limited to, Readers Theatre K-2! and Nursery Rhyme Reader. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $10,221.00 Fringe Amount 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Brooklyn School for Global Scholars Borough Brooklyn School Number 748 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ursula Annio Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lisa Domingo ENL Teacher/ Coor Teacher/Subject Area Cathy Carbonaro ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Larkin ICT Teacher Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Jennifer Guido Coach N/A School Counselor Stephanie Macca Parent Josephine Sabatino Parent Coordinator Donna Salerno Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 546 Total number of ELLs 82 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.02% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 748 utilizes TCRWP assessment tool to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. The data that is derived from this assessment provides insight about ELLs progress through reading abilities, reading fluency, oral language skills, writing, spelling patterns, literal and inferential questioning. The data received from these assessments helps our schools instructional plan to better incorporate the specific needs of ELLs in the classrooms and school. Throughout the year, teachers keep checklists and running records that pertain to student progress in reading and writing. All checklists are aligned to the common core learning standards and Teachers College based running records. For example, a student who was a beginner ELL reading at level A, moved up to a level B by January. We are able to record their progress through checklists and running records. Using these tools, the classroom and ENL teacher are able to target the ELLs reading domains and assist the ELL to become a stronger reader. This year, teachers have incorporated teacher created assessments in all subject areas based on units of study and the 2018-19 CEP 54  common core learning standards. Along with teacher made assessments, students are responsible to complete culminating projects which are also rubriced based on the common core learning standards. In terms of formal assessments, students take the MOSL in both ELA and Math that enables teachers to see the growth of students from September to June. Using these assessment tools we narrow down a students individual learning and target the areas they need most help. If we did not record this data, the student would not have had the opportunity to excel as quickly as he/she did. Students are assessed multiple times throughout the year whether it is done with projects or through assessments. Depending on student growth, the data is used to create small group instruction and is used to provide insight according to individual student needs rather than whole group. Along with NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, ENL teachers also use checklists to track ELL progress in the four modalities. The collaboration between ENL and classroom teachers allows for successful planning according to ELLs individual needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures we have in place to support this effort are common planning time amongst grades, department meetings and cross grade meetings. Teachers also meet weekly during DATA Inquiry to discuss student progress and meet within departments. Common planning amongst grades, departments and cross grades allows for best practices and teacher created assessments to guide student success. Teachers make efforts to share student progress during common planning time and also during Monday professional development time. Once discussed, teachers then decided what steps to take to ensure ultimate student success in their grade as a whole and individual classroom setting. Aside from classroom teachers, the DATA team at P.S. 748 has focused on created formative assessments for all grades and learners to better assist students with tracking their own learning experience. The DATA team has taken much time to discuss student outcomes and track progress amongst all grade levels. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments that are being used are the ELL Baseline Assessment, NYC Math and ELA Performance Tasks. In September as well as May, students are given the MOSL to show growth across the year. These assessments are given as "mock" assessments to allow students to become familiar with the testing arrangements and to allow for teachers and staff to keep track of student progress and needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In the classroom, teachers use this summative data to create small group instruction. The data allows teachers to group students together based on their needs and strengths to better assist them in their learning. According to the data provided, students will be recommended for AIS Math, AIS ELA or Reading Recovery. Students at P.S. 748 are fortunate enough to have multiple outlets where they can experience small group instruction. In ENL, the data is used to also create small groups for instructional purposes, as well as scheduling purposes. The data also allows for teachers to plan according to student needs and create common planning agendas for upcoming and passed units. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using data, P.S. 748 creates an RTI program that targets students who are below grade level and proficiency. Using specific guidelines for RTI, ELLs are using their home language and background knowledge to work with an RTI teacher to progress and become on grade level. The small group environment allows for the ELLs to work on individual struggles with the attention from the RTI teacher. Using learning ability documents and strategies, the students who are a part of RTI are those who struggling in specific areas and are not meeting the standards in their class level. Depending on student data, ELLs are given the opportunity to work in small group settings in the comfort of their classroom. If determined that ELLs are at risk or in need of intervention (based on their tier), P.S. 748 provides individual student sessions to encourage their skills. Becoming aware of this data, our school creates schedules appropriate for student success pertaining to the students who need the intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 55  Our ELL programs are created according to the EDAT, NYSESLAT scores, NYSITELL scores, Math and ELA scores. Based on student levels, a program is created depicting the amount of mandated minutes the student is to be serviced throughout the school year. Utilizing the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS, students are grouped based on their proficiency level and grade. The EDAT offers teachers students weaknesses in proficiency as well as their strengths. With the flexibility in minutes, in some circumstances, the EDAT tool and assessments inform the ENL coordinator in which the best route to take when programming students. For example, the EDAT assists in determining if the student will benefit from a standalone versus integrated for specific allotted minutes. Based on student grade, proficiency level and strengths, their program is developed mirroring the NYS mandated minutes. Beyond programming, DATA enhances possibilities for small group, individual and whole class planning. Using DATA as a school community, we have dived deeper in looking into students individual strengths and weaknesses and have derived strategies to benefit optimal student growth and success. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During our weekly DATA Inquiry meetings, classroom teachers, clusters and service providers are able to meet and conference about student growth to develop cohesive plans to better provide for individual students. Adjustments that are made consist of small group planning, differentiated planning, implementation of various technology/tools and use of graphic organizers. Through common planning time, curriculum adjustments made to units and servicing students based on their mandated minutes, we create programs that meet the needs of all learners. In cases where students need additional support, AIS math, AIS reading and reading recovery are then proposed to the family of the student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program is created based on students proficiency levels (NYSESLAT and NYSITELL). Students are grouped by grade, level of proficiency and allowable mandated minutes. As part of the CR Part 154.2, standalone ENL is implemented based on the amount of minutes each level group is mandated. Entering students will receive two units of study per week through integrated and stand alone ENL services. Emerging students will receive two units of study per week through integrated and standalone ENL services. Transitioning students will receive 1 unit of study through stand alone and/or integrated ENL services. Expanding students will receive one unit of study through integrated ENL services and commanding students will receive .5 unit of study for an additional two years. Students are grouped based on grade bands and levels. We try to refrain from mixing proficiency levels and prefer to group students according to their similar levels. Implementing standalone and integrated ENL programs allows for optimal student success. Students who will receive standalone ENL services will travel together to the ENL teachers’ classroom on a routine basis to ensure their mandated minutes are received. Integrated ENL will be implemented during the mandated content area in the students’ classroom. Though the standalone model targets a homogeneous group of students, the integrated model is heterogeneous. P.S. 748 prefers not to mix student grade bands together and finds students work best with keeping to their own grade level and proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 56  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The scheduling coordinator, Siobhan Lorina, and ENL coordinator, Lisa Domingo, work together to ensure ELLs receive the mandated minutes according to their proficiency levels. Explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes are delivered through specific requirements. The ENL coordinator and ENL teacher are scheduled according to the classroom teacher schedule. The scheduling coordinator creates blocks where the ENL teacher and coordinator are able to provide integrated or standalone ENL based on the program models. As previously mentioned, our school will ensure that students will receive appropriate mandated minutes. Entering students will receive two units of study per week through integrated and stand alone ENL services. Entering students will receive 360 minutes; 180 minutes will be stand alone with the ENL teacher and 180 minutes will be integrated during ELA. Emerging students will receive two units of study per week through integrated and standalone ENL services; 360 minutes total, 180 minutes integrated during ELA and 180 minutes stand alone with the ENL teacher.. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes; 90 minutes will be integrated during ELA and 90 minutes will be stand alone with the ENL teacher. Expanding students will receive one unit of study through integrated ENL services, 180 minutes, and commanding students will receive .5 unit of study through integrated instruction, 90 minutes. Using the program models, we will ensure the students are receiving their mandated minutes by scheduling the ENL teacher and coordinator where applicable in the schedule. Upon creating a schedule, all staff is given a copy of the students schedules to ensure all minutes are being provided in both the classroom and in the ENL standalone classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Using the common core learning standards, ToMs and ENL progressions as a guide, core content is implemented through teacher created curriculums. Content is made comprehensible to foster language development by teaching the four modalities using ToMS and standard expectations. Collaboration amongst ENL teachers and classroom teachers is vital to ensure that ELLs are learning content based material using ENL strategies. Our schools tentative plan is to consider having entering and emerging students learn how to transition in the classroom through integrated ENL, as well as out of the classroom, through standalone ENL. Transitioning and commanding ENL will be a part of standalone ENL in the ENL teachers classroom. Lastly, expanding ENL students will be a part of integrated ENL in their classroom. During standalone ENL students will be pulled out to the ENL teachers’ classroom where as during integrated ENL, the ENL teacher will provide services in the students classroom during class instruction. Materials such as iPads, ENL specific books (Nat Geo, On Our Way to English, Benchmark and Attanasio), and manipulatives will be used to ensure ELL participation. Sheltered instruction is used when integrated into the classroom. Sheltered instruction is preferred during integrated instruction to ensure students are following with their classroom teacher instruction. During stand alone instruction students are encouraged to use their L1 as well as English to transfer information over. Incorporating integrated and standalone ENL services into the students schedule will help meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 748 follows a Freestanding ENL program model where English is the target language during 100% of instruction. According to ToMs, entering and emerging students are provided with their L1 when needed through worksheets or bilginual dictionaries. Using grade level content is encouraged in all grades no matter the student proficiency level and allows students the opportunity to meet their grade level standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year, teachers include students’ home language in posters, anchor charts, bilingual staff for translation help and technology. The use of glossaries and periodic assessments in the students’ home language are provided when necessary. The Spanish Lab, Chinese reading test, SIFE questionnaire, and LENs are also tests given in students’ home language which provides teachers with appropriate home language assessment. ENL and classroom teachers also monitor student language development through interactions, classroom events, and daily activities. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 57  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A) We do not have any SIFE students in our school. In the event of a SIFE student enrolling, we plan to use the SIFE questionnaire, MLS, and look closely at student work to determine their levels and strengths in their education. From this data, we will take the appropriate steps to placing them in a class and providing necessary services.B) Based on the time period a newcomer enters our school, we strategically arrange for students to be placed in a suitable class where he/she has a peer that shares the home language. We also introduce the child to any staff that may have a common home language. In the event there is no staff or child with a common home language, we use pictures, translations, and gestures to welcome the child to our school. We begin ENL services as soon as we receive NYSITELL results and upon receiving all signed parent surveys/ ENL information. We then begin to emerce the student into the English language. Along with in school strategies, we offer supplemental ENL after school services that provide students with additional English support.C) For developing students, we use data from the NYSESLAT, EDAT and classroom assessments to determine the best instruction for these students. This subgroup of ELLs contains students with various modality abilities and we use the data to differentiate our instruction based on their independent needs. Using strategies, techniques, and English language practice, we gear our lessons towards the students needs in mind. At our school we are strong believers of small group instruction and we use this small group time to target students’ needs.D) As of this year, we do not have any long term ELLs. In the event that we do have long term ELLs, we will use data from the NYSESLAT, state assessments, and classroom work to determine the students progress. Using the data we will be able to create successful plans to best meet the needs of these ELLs. We will also use this data to arrange any necessary services that we have available, such as AIS and RTI.E) PS 748 has planned to differentiate instruction for former ELLs by implementing strategies into their classroom learning time. Along with strategies in the classroom, former ELLs will be madated to receive two years of service after exiting ENL. Appropriate time mandates of 90 minutes will be incorporated into the school schedule. Integrating ENL strategies with their classroom learning will allow for students to use strategies to continue growing in their academics. ENL teachers will use this time to help transition students from ENL to the classroom by using strategies, strategic instruction and common planning with the classroom teachers. The transition will provide students with guidance and support but also prepare students to become independent workers for the years beyond ENL. Collaboration amongst teachers is important to create lessons targeting former ELLs independent needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development by implementing small group work, hands- on activities, teacher- created materials, and appropriate room décor. Teachers place anchor charts, pictures, a word wall, and word banks throughout the room that have pictures and English language to support student learning. In addition to supporting learners with charts, teachers also provide students with personal charts which are then taped to their desks or placed in a folder for student independent use. Materials that are incorporated are age and grade level appropriate. Using catalogs and programs such as National Geographic REACH, assistive APPs or graphic organizers, teachers with ELL-SWDS are able to plan accordingly. The visuals have proved to be a great support for ELL-SWDs because they are gaining their independence when completing activities. The use of SMARTBoard and Promethean boards encourage learning through visuals and enhanced development. Small group instruction is geared towards ELL-SWDs individual needs based on assessments and checklists. Using worksheets, manipulatives, book clubs and wipe off boards, teachers take the small group time to identify students’ needs and address them by implementing strategies. Many materials provided are teacher created that gear towards students’ abilities. Manipulatives are also used to support ELL-SWD in hands on activities to target the students’ kinesthetic memory. Teachers use data and student work to provide students’ with optimal success. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers, Speech teachers, AIS and Special Education teachers work closely to create curricular, instructional, and flexible scheduling to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals. The higher ELL-SWD become mainstreamed for a unit block to enable optimal learning for their goals. The intermediate and low ELL-SWD work with paraprofessional (when possible) to obtain 1-1 individual support. ELL- SWDs in ICT classes are strategically placed based on their learning needs, NYSESLAT modality report and language acquisition. The ICT classroom allows for ELL-SWDs to target their needs in a mainstream 2018-19 CEP 58  environment. Together, the ENL teacher, classroom teachers and service providers plan, discuss and create lessons that target students individual needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ENL program is designed to support all ENL students at all levels. Beyond our ENL program, the ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to plan units, activities, and support strategies for students in ENL and in their classroom environment. Beyond ENL, students receive AIS services, additional math services, reading recovery and additional language development through an F- Status support teacher. These additional services are done in small group and geared towards meeting the needs of individual students. AIS and math are targeted towards developing ELLs. Newcomer ELLs are given support through in class strategies, ENL services, and after school opportunities. Integrated ENL allows for ENL teachers to work closely with classroom teachers to target Social Studies and Science content in the classroom. In all programs, the use of students native language is encouraged through material used, labels, and allowing students to use their L1 to transfer to English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we have purchased and plan to implement the National Geographic REACH. Also, the structure and schedule of ENL will be revised to accommodate the new program models for ENL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not participate nor do we anticipate to discontinue any programs or services at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs by having options to join groups, clubs or activities. During the school day, ELLs are given the opportunity to choose an "enrichment" course they are interested in such as, cooking, painting, or dancing. In these enrichment courses, ELLs are socializing with new friends, as well as learning content in a new manner. ELLs are encouraged to participate through translated letters home and in school explanations. Translators, phone translations, and notices in their home languages are provided for ELLs to be a part of the school community. ENL after school is offered to ELLs in our school to support their academic learning. If parents agree to have their child attend after school, ELLs receive additional support beyond the school day. Additionally, ELLs are given the opportunity to attend the NIA, Home Sweet Home after school, Chang Learning and the Federation of Italian American Organizations that are offered. Notices and information are given in English and the parents preferred language. After school programs encourage students to develop social skills while obtaining tutoring in a social environment. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs are various leveled/themed books, IPADs using appropriate ENL APPs, RazKids subscription, wipe off boards and markers, hands on materials for activities, such as paper, glue, etc, and vocabulary building cards/glossaries. The use of the SMARTBoard and Promethean Board make access to language possible through pictures, translations, and hands on learning. Subgroups also have access to all learning materials, such as Raz- Plus Support ELLs, and encouraged to use the materials during lessons. P.S. 748 follows a project based learning curriculum where many hands on projects are incorporated in most unit lessons. ELLs are supported through using various techniques to express their learning whether it be through pictures, writing, using their L1 or through presentations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At this time we do not have dual language or transitional bilingual ENL at PS 748. Home language support is delivered in our Freestanding ENL program model. The use of glossaries, picture related charts, language libraries and library books are available and students’ native language is present. 25% of students’ home language is required to be present during the ELLs education and it is presented through access to translators, available notices in their home language and the use of 2018-19 CEP 59  technology. We also use strategic placement for ELLs to be in a class with a student of common language or a staff member with a common language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 748 ensures all required services/ resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels by using the data from the EDAT tool. For example, understanding that an ELL scored at an emerging level and is reading level A books in the classroom, the ENL and classroom teacher collaborate to use level appropriate resources. If the student is a fourth grader reading a C level, the ENL and classroom teacher will find appropriate material that is age appropriate along with their cognitive needs. Services and resources are available to provide ELLs with individual learning. The use of data is necessary to incorporate age and grade level materials. Upon receiving materials, the ENL and classroom teacher uses the age and grade level materials to support the student needs while, keeping content level appropriate. Differentiation occurs in the classroom and lesson plans based on student needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we do not share a building, we are semi-attached to another school. We do share resources at times and strive to create a cohesive transition for students transferring to either school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, the ENL coordinator and parent coordinator create a schedule that enables ELLs and their parents to experience a smooth transition. Fifth grade volunteers assist in guiding ELLs to their classroom and introducing the students to their teachers. The principal, assistant principal and parent coordinator assists parents through walk through tours (if necessary) and the fifth grade students prepare a meet and greet with ELLs who speak common home languages. Access to over the phone translators, as well as in person translators are readily available. The ENL coordinator then creates flexible schedules to prepare newcomers for entering the new school. Prior to Kindergarten, P.S. 748 hosts a Kindergarten orientation for all parents and incoming families. Throughout the school year, parents are given multiple opportunities to come to our school and see first hand their child's learning environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 748 follows a Freestanding ENL program model using English for 100% of instructional time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel is to provide training during designated non-attendance student days and having ENL pedagogue turnkey any and all important information to all teachers. In addition to formal professional developments, PS 748 hosts professional book clubs during extended professional time, in which teachers read scholarly articles and research based books such as, “Helping English Language Learners Succeed” by Dunlap and Weisman. Upon 2018-19 CEP 60  utilizing these resources, teachers gather and reflect on their findings in terms of ELLs. Our plan is to involve all teachers of ELLs in professional developments about strategies, assessments, learning techniques, and individual support. We have also geared our DATA Inquiry weekly meetings to focus on ELL development and using research based findings to gear our lessons to target ELL needs. Professional development in school or outside is offered to teachers to better strategize, plan, and guide ELLs in the classroom. Professional developments that have been completed are: Orton- Gillingham Literacy strategies, Literacy Development & Language Acquisition (The Reading Process), National Geographic, and teacher led ENL strategy workshop. In the past two years, our ENL coordinator has attended many sessions given by Lucia Medina-Perez in which she turn keyed information to better suit our ELLs. As of recent, our ELL coordinator and ELL teachers have hosted "ELL Workshops" for all staff, including non- pedagogic. The focus of the workshops are to enhance understanding of our "role" as educators, strategies and best practices. All members are being accounted for servicing ELLs and are being given resources to enhance their role in the school community. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 748 meets the professional development requirements by utilizing our Monday PD time (2:20-4pm) to enhance our ELL specific strategies. Either hosted in house by ENL teachers, turn keying information or having outside vendors, such as Nat Geo, we use this time to support our ELLs. Beyond using our PD time, our ENL coordinator and UFT Chapter Leader keeps teachers updated with upcoming ENL PDs through the"Division of English Language Learners and Student Support" emails. Our ENL coordinator forwards any ELL PD opportunity shown through DELLs or the UFT to all teachers encouraging them to attend. Records are kept through attendance sheets, agendas and certificates of completion. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Beyond parent teacher conferences, ENL teachers make an initiative to schedule 1-1 parent meetings to discuss student progress with parents. We begin with sending home individual student reports, in English and their preferred language, which indicate NYSESLAT scores and a break down of all four modalities. We then schedule individual conferences to meet with parents. If parents are unable to meet in person, the ENL teachers have phone conferences and keep logs of phone calls. If necessary, email and notices on school letter head are sent home with a tear off to ensure parents have received notices. Along with conferences, PS 748 established goal booklets that are sent home in the months of November, February, and April indicating student goals and must have a parent signature signifying they have reviewed it. If parents have a preferred language, all notices are sent home in English as well as their preferred language. We use translations and outreach to ensure parent communication is involved in ELL education. Beyond notices, ENL teachers monitor student language development through teacher made checklists. The checklists are used to discuss student growth with parents/guardians. Beyond student growth, discussions of our program goals are explained, in which parents have the opportunity to ask questions about their child's learning environment. When discussing student language development needs and program goals, ENL teachers offer many resources to parents. Resources are given to target learning development needs for both the parent and child. The resources are targeted for at home and in school success. Resources include APPs for a tablet or phone, websites for computers, vocabulary enhancement books and various language building activities. All resources given are decided based on student individual needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 748 hosts numerous parent involvement activities. Donna Salerno keeps a respected presence in our school as the Parent Coordinator and is in touch with parents on a daily basis. She also keeps relationships with after school programs, such as Chang Learning, in case of need of translation or assistance. Our PTA consists of ELL parents and with their help we are able to fund in school activities and events. Activities include international day, culture fairs, bake sales, relay for life, Latin dance, enrichment courses (throughout the school day), and book sales. In April, our ENL coordinator and ENL teacher host an "ENL 2018-19 CEP 61  Parent Academy" where parents are informed of the years work and what to expect as the school year is coming to a close. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to come to see, listen and discuss the process and progress of the ELLs in our building. All students and families are encouraged to attend events through fliers, Remind 101 and text messages. Beyond fliers, teachers send home newsletters that inform parents of their child’s class updates. Parents are informed of special events, classroom projects, upcoming dates, and their child’s learning. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Beyond ENL services for students, our parent coordinator leads a free ENL parent English language course. This course is offered to all parents to learn the English basics, receive any important school wide information, and assists parents to become part of their child’s learning. Many parents attend and appreciate the class for its content, as well as the information they are provided throughout the school year. We look forward to continuing and expanding this program. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ursula Annio, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Brooklyn School for Global School DBN: 20K748 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ursula Annio Title Principal Jennifer Guido Assistant Principal Donna Salerno Parent Coordinator Lisa Domingo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Josephine Sabatino Parent Cathy Carbonaro Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Stephanie Macca School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jennifer Larkin Other ICT Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 9/27/17 - - - 9/27/17 - - 9/27/17 - - 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K748 School Name: P.S. 748 Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Donna Salerno Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to asses language preferences are conducted through the Pupil secretary, ENL teachers/coordinator, classroom teachers, and Parent Coordinator. Upon students entering our school, the HLIS is completed and parents are encouraged to complete the form in their preferred language. Based on parent responses, the ENL coordinator provides an interpreter or phone translation service to provide the parent with any necessary translations. Once the HLIS is completed, the pupil secretary and ENL coordinator work together to input parent preferences into ATS under student data. Along with the HLIS, parents are asked to complete emergency contact cards and a brief language survey to indicate their preferred language. Apart from the mandated forms, P.S. 748 completes parent orientations for all parents with translators to ensure parent language preferences. The orientations allow parents to take part of the school community through their native language. Parent orientations allow for parents to distinguish their preferences based on written and oral communication. Our Parent Coordinator also keeps note of parent language preference to better assist parents in times of need and concerns. After all orientations and forms are completed, classroom teachers and school leadership also become aware of parent language preferences through ATS reports and notes that are placed on 2018-19 CEP 65  file for teacher reference. All languages other than English are highlighted to ensure all staff is aware of any preferred languages. Once completed, all staff members in the school are aware of parent language preference and are knowledgeable of what steps to take to communicate in written or oral form. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese (ANY) Cantonese Italian Mandarin English Polish Russian Slovak Spanish Turkish Tadzhik (AKA Tajik) Urdu Ukrainian 1 16 1 94 0 4 0 395 4 31 1 88 1 1 15 2 0.15 2.44 0.15 14.35 0 0.61 0 60.31 0.61 4.73 0.15 13.44 0.15 0.15 2.29 0.31 1 15 2 83 4 4 10 391 3 32 1 87 1 1 17 2 0.15 2.29 0.31 12.67 0.61 0.61 1.53 59.69 0.46 4.89 0.15 13.28 0.15 0.15 2.6 0.31 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 66  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Handbook September NYC School Account Throughout the year Fundraising Letter Throughout the year School event (auction, bake sale, etc) Throughout the year Parent Teacher Conferences Throughout the year Monthly Calendars Monthly Adult ENL Classes February Media Consent Entry of new admits Holiday Letters Throughout the year HIV Letters Throughout the year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE T/I Unit for translation. We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We use school based staff for language translations. We use school based staff for language translations. We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We also use provided DOE intranet template(s). We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We also use provided DOE intranet template(s). We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We also use provided DOE intranet template(s). We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We also use provided DOE intranet template(s). Ell Orientation/ Entitlement, Cont'd Entitlement/Non-Entitlement/Continuation Letters September We use DOE Intranet template(s). NYS Testing Dates and Memo March/April/May We use DOE T/I Unit for translation as well as school based staff for non- covered languages. We also use provided DOE intranet template(s). 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences Throughout the year Parent Academies Monthly ELL Parent Orientation September IEP Meetings When Scheduled Tuesday, Parent Engagement Tuesday PD Time (2:20-3:15) When Scheduled interpretation service(s)? We use over the phone interpretation service as well as bilingual school based personnel. We use bilingual staff and volunteers for non covered languages. We use bilingual staff and volunteers for non covered languages. We use over the phone interpretation service as well as bilingual school based personnel. We use over the phone interpretation service as well as bilingual school based personnel. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our schools communication strategy to reach limited- English- proficient families in the event of a school emergency is having school based bilingual staff assist us in calling parents or using the translation and interpretation unit over the phone. In the event that the parent must reach us, we also use school based staff or outside vendors to assist us with over the phone or in person translations. In the event of an emergency with a child, we use the contact blue card to determine what the parent has decided to do in terms of an emergency (ie. Call 911). We then use the translation unit, school based staff, or outside vendors to call and assist the parent(s). In the event a parent must reach us, we use the same outlets such as over the phone translation, school staff translator or outside vendor to assist. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that staff members are aware of the goal by having our LAC turnkey important information to the entire staff community. Compliance will be monitored through monthly letter assistance and parent involvement in school activities. The LAC will ensure that all regulations are met in terms of translation, family participation and accessibility to translation personnel. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 68  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When entering the building, P.S. 748 provides a bulletin board that provides notices and information in various languages and English. Parents are offered the opportunity to read, write, and speak in their preferred language by email, phone translation units, or in person translations. The welcome poster provides parents with the opportunity to choose their language and the staff, including secretaries and parent coordinator, assists the parents with the translation needs. Using the DOE translation services, as well as outside services such as parent volunteer, we are able to accommodate and fulfill parental notification requirements. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school incorporates parent surveys beyond the Department of Education and asks for parent feedback through our school website and parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 69 
