2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75K753 School Name: P.S. K753 - SCHOOL FOR CAREER DEVELOPMENT Principal: YVROSE PIERRE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn School for Career Development 307500013753 9-12 School Number (DBN): 75K753 510 Clermont Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11238 (718) 857-4646 Phone Number: (718)857-0565 Fax: Yvrose Pierre Ypierre4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Yvrose Pierre Debra Haywood Louis Garrison Griselda Delarosa N/A GumaineWilliams GamaelLouis N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, New York, New York 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212)802-1503 Phone Number: (212) 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Borough Director, 94 Bernadette Fitzgerald District 75 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marie Callaghan Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 400 1st Avenue, New York, New York 10010 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov MCallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 (212) 802-1604 (718) 935-2382 (212) 802-1527 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yvrose Pierre Debra Haywood Louis Garrison N/A GumaineWilliams GamaelLouis N/A Latisha Surrency CheniseClarke Griselda Delarosa *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Vice President/Parent Member/ Secretary/Parent Member/ Treasurer/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marie F Bernier Lucille Ross Altagracia Valdez AnetraDouglas Patricia Windham Barbara Aronson Member/Teacher/staff Member/Teacher/staff Member/Staff Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher/Staff Member/Teacher/Staff Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Brooklyn School for Career Development (BSCD) is a learning community steeped in collaboration, understanding and respect. Our common interests are embedded in improving learning, providing authentic instruction, and creating new opportunities for all of our students. BSCD provides instructional experiences that are tailored to students’ individual needs. Our driving philosophy is that all students can learn. Specialized learning environments facilitate seamless student transition into the world of work and continuing education to become active members of society. Through the implementation of academically rigorous programs, rich in Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics, students achieve personal, academic and vocational success. Programs are aligned with the Common 2018-19 CEP 9  Core Learning Standards to equip our students across all sites with the necessary tools to become successful 21st century learners. Through a collaborative effort, and curricula created by highly-trained professionals, we empower students to apply their knowledge beyond the classroom. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BSCD is a unique school community serving students with special needs. Approximately 100 students who are classified as emotionally challenged attend at our main site. These students face academic deficits, are negatively influenced by their peers and other societal factors, and must meet the standard graduation requirements for high school diplomas. Approximately 80 students attend our Aveyron Academy at the Canarsie Educational Campus. The majority of these students are classified as having autism disorders and all participate in alternate assessment. We have approximately 30 overage students who participate in alternate assessment or are pursuing CDOS Commencement Credentials at Aveyron Technical Academy. Eighteen students participate in our inclusion programs at Clara Barton high School and Urban Action Academy. Our new middle school site, Aveyron STEAM Academy, serves approximately 40 sixth grade students who are classified as having autism disorders and participate in alternate assessment. To this end, we have created a CDOS tracking system, and expanded our vocational training opportunities to include Human Services certification in Child Care Worker, Group Activities Aide, Adult Day Care worker, and Community Action Worker. These certifications are aligned with the CDOS and Community Support Skill Standards. At the same time, we have embraced the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and prepared our students for the Common Core Regents examinations in ELA and Algebra. We have integrated technology, blended learning, credit recovery, and independent study into our classroom instruction and course offerings. We have created school-based work opportunities for our students and have approximately 75 students participating in the Transition Opportunity Program (TOP). Across all sites, as a school community, we have fostered collaboration within our pedagogical staff. We have provided the structure for departmental meetings, interdepartmental professional learning communities, Pupil Personnel Team, Inquiry Team, and a variety of other teams/committees. Incoming teachers are supported by veteran teachers. Groups of teachers collaborate to organize special events and implement school-wide initiatives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Although the students at the main site participate in standardized assessment, we have an increasing population of students who participate in alternate assessment. Therefore, we are forging relationships with new community businesses to offer work-based learning opportunities to our students and embedding interdisciplinary STEAM thematic units that integrate the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and develop the "Lifelong Practices of Readers and Writers". 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 academic year we continued to increase the rigor of our instruction which is reflected in the improved student achievement as indicated by the higher passing rate on Regents examinations, and the increased number of students graduating with Regents or Local Diplomas, (several who graduated with CDOS commencement credentials in addition to their diplomas), the results of the NYC Performance Assessment Tasks in ELA and Algebra, and our alternate assessment students' scores on SANDI/FAST. For the 2018-2019 academic year, our focus will be on continuing to increase instructional rigor, and providing opportunities to augment collaborative teaching, and increasing parental involvement. 2018-19 CEP 10  2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K753 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 228 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 13 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.7% % Reduced Lunch 11.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 23.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 7 63.2% 0.4% 97.4% 65.8% 2.6% 0.0% 4 20% 8.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of 8th grade ELA and Math scores for incoming students, Regents results, NYC Performance Assessment Tasks results, and NYSESLAT results, credit accumulation by 2017-18 freshmen, a review of attendance data, and a snapshot of student IEPs indicates that there is a group of approximately 50 students who function at a much higher level than their school peers and are focused on pursuing the requirements for Local and/or Regents diplomas. There is also a group of approximately 25 overage/under-credited students who can take advantage of the expanded safety net to achieve high school diploma. Strengths:  highly-qualified teachers  disseminated syllabi      clear expectations improved Regents results focused Regents preparation classes college counseling improved SANDI/FAST results Weaknesses:  most teachers are certified in special education, rather than in content areas  teacher assignments are adjusted mid-year to reflect the needs of the school organization Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of rigorous instruction, highly-effective teaching, highly-effective school leadership, and the infusion of STEAM, BSCD will see a 5% increase in credit accumulation and test scores among our standardized students, including those at our inclusion sites, and a 10% increase in SANDI/FAST scores of our alternate students in Reading and Math subtests. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Expansion of the BSCD Dream Implementation of Essentials for Living Implementation of a Work-Readiness curriculum Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lead teachers Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Assistant Principal Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Sept 2018 thru June 2019 CTE-certified teacher, unit coordinators from Aveyron Academy and Aveyron Technical Center, and community-based worksites 10th, 11th, and 12th Grade students who have earned 16 academic credits 11th and 6:1:1 students at Aveyron Academy and Aveyron STEAM Academy Students who participate in Alternate Assessment and students who participate in standardized assessment who are 18 years of age with less than 20 credits 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  Alternating monthly workshops for parents organized by the parent coordinator with presentations by lead teachers, unit coordinators, school counselors, transition coordinator, and representatives from outside agencies. September and June workshops for parents of alternate assessment students will take place at Aveyron Academy and for parents of standardized assessment students will take place at the main site. October, February, and April workshops at Aveyron Academy. November, January, and May workshops at the main site. December and March workshops at Aveyron STEAM Academy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Pedagogical staff, Citywide Instructional Expectations, Framework for Great Schools , Advance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November 2018, February 2019, and April 2019 transcript reviews with parents of standardized students for credit accumulation will indicate that 50% of the students earned at least 5 credits during the Fall 2018 semester and are on track for earning 10 credits for the academic year. Transcript reviews at these benchmarks with parents of alternate assessment students will indicate that 65% of the students participated in the Work-Readiness curriculum. Progress monitoring for the middle school students will be based on SANDI/FAST results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. STARS, courses and grades 2. SANDI/FAST results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Historical data suggests that when students are safe, attendance increases, behavior improves and students steadily move forward towards graduation. Students across all sites react to perceive threats with school avoidance and/or behavioral manifestations of their discomfort. Strengths: staff members across sites are purposefully trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in schools gang awareness workshop    monthly safety and pupil personnel team meetings Weaknesses:  need for a full time dean at Aveyron Academy  scanning needed at Aveyron Technical Academy to facilitate moving a greater number of students to that site Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, across our organization, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of behavioral outbursts/incidents as documented on SWIS forms and OORS data. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continued training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in schools. Parental workshops on gang awareness Intersite safety meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New staff members 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th Grade Students at main site Deans, unit coordinators Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Assistant Principal Parent coordinator Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Alternating monthly workshops for parents organized by the parent coordinator with presentations by deans, unit coordinators, school counselors,, and representatives from outside agencies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  February 2019 review and analysis of SWIS referrals and OORs data will indicate a 55 decrease in behavioral outbursts incidents February 2019review of minutes of monthly safety team meetings will indicate that at least two intersite safety meetings have taken place. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SWIS referrals OORS data Minutes of safety team meetings Minutes of pupil personnel meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An exploration of the Framework for Great Schools indicates the need for increased inter-site and interdepartmental collaboration. We must engage in purposeful scheduling to facilitate opportunities for teachers at our newest site to collaborate with those at our well established sites. Strengths:  Monthly instructional cabinet meetings in which leaders from all sites participate  Ongoing professional development  Professional learning communities within sites Weaknesses: ·Few inter-visitations between sites few purposefully scheduled opportunities for collaboration between teachers from all sites (for example, multi-site math departmental meetings) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the development of a New Teacher Institute there will be a 5% increase in the number of effective teachers based on Advance observations, analysis and progress monitoring. Teachers will meet regularly, collaborate and support each other and attend small group workshops provided by administration. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). New Teacher Institute will facilitate greater and more meaningful support for new teachers. Small group workshops for all alternate assessment teachers: Essentials for Living SANDI/FAST, NYSAA Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators. district autism coaches, lead teachers Assistant Principal and lead teachers New teachers all sites Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Oct 2017 thru June 2018 New teachers at Aveyron Academy and Aveyron STEAM Academy Quarterly universal instructional themes All teachers Pre-scheduled inter-site departmental meetings (for example, ELA, main site, September 2018; math, Aveyron Academy, October 2018) Main site and Aveyron Academy teachers Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Instructional cabinet Assistant Principals, lead teachers, unit coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Universal instructional themes will be presented at the September, November, February and April parental workshops and parents will be invited to quarterly showcases at the various sites. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Pedagogical staff, Framework for Great Schools 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November 2018, and February 2019. A review of Advance data will indicate a 3% increase in the number of effective teachers. A review of artifacts from the New Teacher Institute will indicate that each new teacher has participated in at least three New Teacher Institute sessions per quarter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. agendas, minutes, and sign-in sheets from New Teacher Institute sessions Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of diverse data, including credit accumulation, attendance, and tracking of CDOS hour highlights the obstacles that our students face in preparing for competitive employment. Our students, whether they participate in standardized assessment or alternate assessment, must be career-ready when they leave high school. For our alternate assessment population, the effort must begin with our middle school students at our new site Strengths:  Transition coordinator   Seasoned attendance teacher increased participation in Transition Opportunity Program (TOP) and Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) vocational classes and shops increased numbers of students earning CDOS Commencement Credentials or CDOS Endorsements to their high school diplomas   Weaknesses:  Lack of in-house certification for students who demonstrate proficiency in specific career pathways, whether they participate in standardized or alternate assessment Lack of Implementation of career plans for all standardized students upon enrollment in high school   difficulty engaging those students with intermittent attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of increased student participation in vocational training and improved transition planning practices, BSCD will see a 5% increase in student attendance across the organization. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Purposing of Aveyron Technical Academy to meet the transition and vocational needs of our oldest alternate assessment students and our standardized students who are over 18 years of age with less than 20 credits over age, under credit standardized students Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Administrators, shop teachers, transition coordinator, unit coordinator, counselors oldest alternate assessment students Progress tracker for each certification area with course sequence indicated in STARS Shop teachers Sept 2018 thru June 2019 Administrators, work-based learning coordinator, programming 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to a Grand Re-opening Luncheon at the Aveyron Technical Academy during October 2018. Parents will be offered an opportunity to participate in an after-school Parent Certification Academy, leading to their own certification in a common career pathway Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Aveyron Technical Academy, shop teachers, programmers to align course sequence in STARS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 --An analysis of ATS data will indicate a 5% increase in student attendance. February 2019, at least 12 students (alternate assessment and/or standardized assessment) will have completed 2 courses in a career pathway sequence or have completed a satisfactory 10-week internship with a community work-based learning partner. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. STARS transcripts 2. Shop attendance records 3. Student attendance at Aveyron Technical Academy 4. ATS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parental and student interviews have revealed that many of our standardized students and their parents are not aware of the requirements for high school diplomas, including credit accumulation, passing Regents examinations, and attendance. Many of our parents alternate assessments students do not understand that their children will not receive high school diplomas and that transition planning must commence well before graduation. We must forge closer ties with community-based organizations to help our standardized students succeed academically and to help all of our students succeed vocationally. Strengths:  parent coordinator   transition coordinator repurposing of Aveyron Technical Academy Weaknesses:   consistent transition team meetings few partnerships with community-based organizations Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent attendance and participation at meetings, events, and workshops as evidenced by sign in sheets beginning in August 2018. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Re-purposing of Aveyron Technical Academy to meet the vocational needs of alternate students and standardized students who are over 18 years with less than 20 credits students over the age of 18 Sept 2017 thru June 2018 Administrators, unit coordinator, counselors Partnerships with community-based organizations (AHRC, ACCES-VR, Workforce 1, etc.) Monthly Transition Team meetings with community-based organizations and parents students over the age 18 Sept 2018 thru June 2019 transition coordinator and counselors Transition Team and parents Sept 2018 thru June 2019 transition coordinator and parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be invited to quarterly Transition workshops which will be hosted in conjunction with community-based organizations, including NYC Department of Youth and Community Development, ACCES-VR, OPWDD, and AHRC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. "Transition Talk" monthly newsletter, common planning between parent coordinator, transition coordinator, and Aveyron Technical Academy unit coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  Attendance snapshots in November 2018, February 2019, and April 2019, will indicate displayed a 5% increase in students' attendance rates across all sites. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in documents from monthly transition team meetings and parent teacher conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 on 8 th grade ELA: Writing skills, whole class, during the school day Participation in Alternate Assessment: : Failure Free Reading,, whole class, during the school day Level 1 on 8 th grade Math: Math skills, whole class, during the school day Participation in Alternate Assessment: Math skills, whole class, during the school day Level 1 on 8 th grade ELA and Math: Science access skills, small group, during the school day or 1:1 after school Level 1 on 8 th grade ELA and Math: Social Studies access skills, small group, during the school day or 1:1 after school Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group Whole class During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Writing skills,Failure Free Reading, I-READ text annotation strategies Math skills Small group During the school day Pre-algebra Whole class Science access skills and use of Earth Science reference tables Small group and 1:1 During the school day Social Studies access skills and map skills Small group and 1:1 During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As mandated by the student’s IEP: School counseling (related service), small group and 1:1, during the school day School counseling Small group and 1:1 During the school day 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Although we do not receive a specific allocation, we provide support services including mandated counseling, school supplies, bus transportation or MetroCards, medical attention by the school nurse, and clothing/food, if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 33  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. N/A School-Parent Compact (SPC) Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 39  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 40  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Brooklyn School for Career Development Borough Brooklyn School Number 753 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Yvrose Pierre Coach Tahirah Francois ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher A. Saad Ahmed, ENL Teacher/Subject Area B. Aronson/English Teacher Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Michael Connelly Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Bri-Anne Alleyne Coach N/A School Counselor Luis Dorado Parent Mrs. de la Rosa Parent Coordinator Jiselle Thomas Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 41  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 281 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.61% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher assessment of the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) is a continuous and integral part of our ENL instruction. Our assesses via a diagnostic method that is designed to identify and better address our ELLs' linguistic, social, and academic needs. Daily, ongoing assessment is an essential and embedded part of our daily ENL instruction. Also, weekly tests, projects and periodic exams are used. We also use other assessment tools, such as SANDI and NYC Performance Assessment Task. The results of these various assessment methods help teachers better define realistic and measurable goals, state objectives. and accordingly adapt content and adjust our instructional approach. Data gained from the assessments is analyzed and used to inform instruction. The data shows that our ELLs need a composite of different methods of testing to better reflect what they know and can do. . 2018-19 CEP 42  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessment results are analyzed and disseminated to the entire faculty, followed by a a meeting of teachers and related service providers who work with our ENL population. The ESL teacher participates in our English departmental meetings, 10th grade meetings, and collaborates with the teacherss at our alternate assessment sites to aid in development of pacing calendars and integration of ESL methodology, as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program based on various methods. We consider classroom observations, the results of the NYSESLAT, current IEP goals, linguistic and literacy progress as evaluated by the ENL teacher and content area teachers. Our school administrators routinely observe and evaluate the integrated ENL instruction and the stand-alone instruction. It is evident that our ELLs are more engaged, active, and responsive in integrated classes than in stand-alone classes. The ESL teacher and his co-teachers enjoy the opportunity for co-planning and co-teaching. Our ELLs participate in the same assessments as their monolingual peers: standardized assessment ELLs participate in Regents exams and NYC Performance Assessment Tasks in English Language Arts and Algebra; alternate assessment ELLs participate in NYSAA and SANDI/FAST. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessment results are analyzed and disseminated to the entire faculty, followed by a a meeting of teachers and related service providers who work with our ENL population. The data specialist (and ESL liaison) facilitates departmental meetings to specifically discuss the progress that the ELLs have made in the various content areas. As our ELLS are in a wide array of settings, meetings are purposefully scheduled to address the needs of small groups of ELLs. Minutes are recorded and shared with the faculty and administrators. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All of our students are at-risk. Our ELLs participate in all of our academic intervention programs. However, academic intervention is differentiated according to participation in standardized or alternate assessment. Alternate assessment students, including ELLs, participate in Failure Free Reading. Standardized assessment students, including ELLs, participate in Regents preparation, FableVision Animation-ish, and STMath. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of NYSESLAT as indicated by the RLAT report (ATS) show that the focus for most of our students needs to be reading and writing. Data also shows that the majority of our ELLs are at the EMERGING level of English proficiency. However, considering our ELLs’ language deficiencies and learning disabilities, we do not find that the standardized exams are accurate reflections of their ENL levels and their linguistic needs. Therefore, our ENL teacher complements the standardized exams with teacher made assessments, professional observations, and communication with other pedagogues who work directly with our ELLs. The data specialist analyzes the results of NYC Performance Assessment Tasks, SANDI/FAST, and NYSAA, in addition to the results of the NYSESLAT, using EDAT as a guide. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data specialist reviews, analyzes, and disseminates the results of all assessments to the entire faculty. Departmental teacher teams review the findings and recommend individualized changes to students' programs. The results of particular assessments, including informal assessments, influence the scheduling of the ESL teacher and paraprofessional support during instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 43  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. To better address our ELLs’ linguistic, academic, and scheduling needs, in accordance with CR Part 154, students receive integrated ENL and freestanding ENL instruction. ELLs are grouped based on their academic programs with heterogeneous language levels to encourage peer interactions. Instruction focuses on improving our ELLs’ English language skills. By nature of the organization of our various sites, alternate assessment ELLs are not grouped with standardized assessment ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, our school does not offer a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, our school does not offer a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL instruction is divided among four different locations (BSCD main site, Aveyron Academy, Aveyron Technical Academy, our newest site, Aveyron STEAM Academy, and our inclusion programs at Urban Action Academy and Clara Barton High School). Our certified ENL teacher is scheduled to travel and meet with all the ELLs according to their schedules in an effort to provide the mandated units of instruction, to the greatest extent possible. Our ELLs receive their number of units of ENL required by CR Part 154 based on their grade and proficiency levels. They receive both integrated and stand-alone ENL service by our NYS certified ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To better address our ELLs’ linguistic, academic, and scheduling needs,and in accordance with CR Part 154 our ELLs receive integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction. In stand-alone instruction, the ELLs meet with their ENL teacher in a separate class and work on improving their basic English literacy skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing, while addressing the content that their teachers have indicated the respective ELLs are struggling with. As needed, materials and text books used in content area instruction are adapted to improve accessibility for our ELLs. Although ENL instruction is delivered in English, it is differentiated based on the ELL's respective educational setting and English proficiency. Often, technology is integrated into ENL instruction. If necessary, based on the ELL's IEP, an alternate placement paraprofessional supports the student throughout the instructional day, including in freestanding ENL instruction. During integrated instruction, our ENL teacher provides and facilitates the literacy component of the lesson. Our ENL teacher and the content area teachers routinely confer, co-plan, and co-teach. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our Spanish-speaking and Haitian-Creole-speaking ELLs who are classified as ENTERING or EMERGING based on their NYSESLAT scores are appropriately evaluated in their home languages by bilingual pedagogues who are part of our instructional team. ELLs with other home languages are assessed in their home languages through parental interviews and, if necessary, the services of the Language Translation Unit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 CEP 44  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In addition to the cognitive/academic/behavioral challenges faced by our students, the ELLs (within their respective subgroups) are faced with linguistic and cultural challenges. For these ELLs to receive the suitable support and appropriate language service, all of their needs must be acknowledged, assessed, and addressed. Our ELLs are placed into our ENL program based on their IEP mandates and receive instructional units in accordance with CR Part 154 to the greatest extent possible. Currently, we have one student at our Aveyron Academy site who is identified as SIFE. Although he is a newcomer, he demonstrates improved linguistic comfort with the English language and is classified as EMERGING based on his NYSESLAT results. ENL instruction helps him with his verbal communication skills and survival in his new culture. We have two students who are 19 years of age and participate in alternate assessment at Aveyron Technical Academy where the focus is on survival language and the basic interpersonal communication skills necessary to be successful in their post-secondary lives. Bilingual books and dictionaries are provided. Technology and multimedia, strategies such as Total Physical Response, and small-group instruction are infused in language and content instruction to enforce and enrich the four language modalities. One of the newcomers at Aveyron Academy is monolingual Spanish, although her English proficiency is showing improvement, and she is supported by an alternate placement paraprofessional throughout her instructional day. For the developing ELLs, we follow the above strategies while gearing our focus toward developing the four language modalities through content area instruction, supported by stand-alone ENL instruction, in an effort to move improve their English proficiency, specifically in writing. Long term ELLs need materials and instruction that address their literacy deficits. At high school age, the majority of our ELLs fall into this subgroup. For many, their literacy struggles reflect their handicapping conditions and our focus is on developing employment and survival vocabulary and skills. Former ELLs are entitled to and continue to receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL service for a minimum of two years. Most often extended support is provided through integrated ENL instruction. For all subgroups, with the exception of former ELLs, materials need to be modified and methods need to be differentiated to suit the individual ELL's cognitive, linguistic, cultural, academic needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The linguistic focus of our ENL program is delivered through content area materials, STEAM-based thematic teaching, and differentiated instruction. Whether participating in integrated or stand-alone ENL instruction, students are placed in flexible groups to facilitate small group instruction. Technology and multimedia are infused in all instruction. ELL-SWDs are engaged in discussions about high school topics, respond to higher-order questions, and are exposed to grade-level instruction. ELL-SWDs who participate in standardized assessment are exposed to the same content area instruction as their monolingual peers: the New York State Scope and Sequence for English, Global Studies, U.S. History, Algebra, and Earth Science; Core Curriculum, vocational classes in cooking, cosmetology, and auto shop; studio arts and media arts; Mock Court; work-based learning; and test sophistication strategies. They are supported by the ESL teacher, counselors, and paraprofessionals, as needed. ELL-SWDs who participate in alternate assessment, at Aveyron Academy, Aveyron STEAM Academy, and Aveyron Technical Academy, are exposed to the same content area instruction as their monolingual peers: Unique Learning Systems; 2018-19 CEP 45  Attainment; EQUALS Math; Essentials for Living (6:1:1 only); activities of daily living (6:1:1 and 8:1:1), culinary arts; work-based learning; and technology. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To address our ELLs’ linguistic, academic, and scheduling needs, in accordance with CR Part-154, they participate in integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction. In an effort to enable our ELL-SWDs to take advantage of our curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility while achieving their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, our ELLs are assigned to four different learning locations (BSCD main site, Aveyron Academy, Aveyron Technical Academy, our newest site, Aveyron STEAM Academy, and our inclusion programs at Urban Action Academy and Clara Barton High School). Our certified ENL teacher is scheduled to travel to all of the sites in an attempt to meet the respective mandated units of instruction for each ELL.. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Content Area Instruction: For timely intervention and better service for our ELLs, certified special education teachers teach English language arts, math, social studies, and science in English. Content area instruction follows NYS Common Core Standards and is in the process of being aligned to Next Generation Learning Standards. English as a New Language (ENL): To facilitate instruction and English language acquisition, ELLs are grouped by their levels of English language proficiency (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding levels) based on the results of their most recent NYSESLAT exams. ELLs are placed into our ENL program based on their IEP mandates and they receive all services specified in their IEPs. ELL-SWDs are faced with cognitive, physical, cultural, and academic challenges in addition to their having to acquire literacy skills in English. Currently, we have only one student who identified as SIFE. Newcomers, including the SIFE student, are supported by bilingual staff members, including paraprofessionals, counselors, school aides, and teachers. Services available for any newcomers or SIFE students include tutoring, community awareness activities, support of home language, and nurturing environment to facilitate language production. The one monolingual Spanish-speaking newcomer is supported by an alternate placement paraprofessional to help her adjust to her new school, new culture, new surroundings, and English-speaking peers. For the developing ELLs, we have a stronger focus on language acquisition skills to drive academic progress. At our middle school site, the two ELLs are working on improvement of their reading fluency and comprehension skills while building writing stamina. At high school age, most of our ELLs are long term ELLs preparing for independence and post-secondary life. . Former ELLs are entitled to 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction for at least two years. In all cases, materials are modified and instruction is differentiated to suit the individual ELL's cognitive, linguistic, cultural, academic needs. Targeted intervention services in English (with translation available in Spanish and Haitian-Creole): Reading-Failure Free Reading Writing-FableVision Animation-ish and The Writing Revolution Math-STMath 2018-19 CEP 46  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For this school year, to better improve instruction, we are exploring the integration of more technology-based learning programs that better address the linguistic, cultural, and learning needs of our ELLs: iLearn credit recovery options for standardized students NYCareerZone Failure Free Reading BarronsOnline Regents preparation Flocabulary 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had one in at least 16 years. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In our school, ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, whether academic, supplemental services, recreational, or cultural in nature Parents of ELLs participate in all parental activities and are provided with translation services, if necessary. ELLs participate in work-based learning (often with a stipend), social and cultural clubs (Girls' Club), educational field trips (American Museum of Natural History, Dave and Buster's), BSCD Academy test preparation (including Saturdays and after-school), and Middle School After-School Initiative after-school program, Gang Awareness presentations, and nurse-facilitated sexual health workshops. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our former ELLs participate in standardized assessment. ELLs who participate in standardized assessment are exposed to the same content area instruction as their monolingual peers: the New York State Scope and Sequence for English, Global Studies, U.S. History, Algebra, and Earth Science; Core Curriculum; vocational classes in cooking, cosmetology, and auto shop; studio arts and media arts; Mock Court; work-based learning; and test sophistication strategies. They are supported by the ESL teacher, counselors, and paraprofessionals, as needed. Our newcomer participate and the overwhelming majority of our long-term ELLs participate in alternate assessment. ELLs who participate in alternate assessment are exposed to the same content area instruction as their monolingual peers: Unique Learning Systems; Attainment; EQUALS Math; Essentials for Living (6:1:1 only); activities of daily living (6:1:1 and 8:1:1), culinary arts; and work-based learning. Smartboards, computer-assisted programs, and web-based reading programs (Failure Free Reading and Unique Learning Systems) facilitate enriched learning experiences for our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only have ENL. Our bilingual staff members support our ELLs and their families. Communication, verbal or written, with our ELL parents are conducted in their respective languages and in English. Our ELLs and their parents are informed about the multilingual and multimedia resources and information available on the NYCDOE website. The school library, classroom libraries, and topics taught, represent our ELLs’ languages and cultures. Home language support is delivered through translation services in person, via telephone, and in writing. It is assessed through parent surveys and collaborative discussions between the members of the Language Allocation Team. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our ELLs are SWDs. Many of our ELLs have learning disabilities, academic deficiencies, and emotional disturbances. Therefore, the content taught and the delivery of instruction need to be grade-level appropriate, age appropriate, and cognitively accessible. That gives our ELLs a sense of inclusion, value, and respect. Our ENL teacher adapts materials and content to better address the linguistic, academic, and learning needs of our ELLs. Our ENL teacher and classroom teachers collaborate to address the linguistic and academic needs of our ELLs. Content area lessons are scaffolded to assure that the ELLs comprehend the presented material. 2018-19 CEP 47  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Several of our sites (Aveyron Academy, Aveyron Technical Academy, and Aveyron STEAM Academy) are co-located. Rather than sharing resources, we coordinate efforts to ensure that the needs of our ELLs are met. At Aveyron Academy, our ELLs who participate in alternate assessment are engaged in work-based learning throughout the Canarsie Educational Campus where they are practicing communication skills, technology, and following multi-step directions. At Aveyron STEAM Academy, our ELLs 6th-grade (only grade we have at that site) participate in alternate assessment and eat lunch and participate in physical education in the shared cafeteria and gym, often with their same age peers from Middle School for Marketing and Legal Studies. At Urban Action Academy and Clara Barton High School, our ELLs participate in our inclusion programs and receive integrated ENL instruction within their inclusive classes. At Aveyron Technical Academy, our transition-aged ELLs participate in community work-based learning at several nearby organizations, including Strong Place for Hope Daycare. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In our school, we ensure that all our new ELLs feel welcome, safe, and comfortable in their new environment. Every effort is made to include incoming ELLs in our summer program, immediately preceding their September enrollment. The parent coordinator and bilingual paraprofessionals make outreach telephone calls in attempts to reach the parents of the incoming ELLs. After admission to our school, our new ELLs and their parents are invited to an orientation meeting to better inform them about our school and the services and programs available for them. During the orientation, ELLs gain familiarity with the school building; meet some of the staff members who will be working with them and those who speak their languages. We encourage our new ELLs to be part of all our school activities (educational, social, cultural, recreational...) and engage them in discussing their cultural and social experiences with their peers. Some of the activities include, games, group meetings, cultural trips, and after school program. We also capitalize on our new ELLs’ skills and knowledge to make them feel valuable and comfortable. Our bilingual staff members are eager to support the newly enrolled ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, we do not offer any language electives to our ELLs. However, any electives that are offered are available to all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, we not offer any dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 48  At our school, we offer teacher team meetings by department and by grade level. The ESL teacher participates in the weekly 10th grade meeting at the main site and in the weekly instructional team meeting at Aveyron Academy to share his concerns about our ELLs. The ESL and content area teachers are encouraged to attend professional developments and conferences offered by District 75 Office of English Language Learners, TESOL organizations, and TESOL academic institutions. September - Idenitification of incoming students of concern, including ELLs, and National Hispanic Heritage Month October - administration of NYC Performance Assessment Tasks to standardized students and SANDI/FAST to alternate assessment students, including ELLs November- Writing IEP goals for ELA and Math, including for ELLs; Celebration of multicultural veterans, implementation of STEAM-based thematic instruction across all sites and student sub-groups, including ELLs. December- Cultural awareness of multicultural holiday celebrations January- Administration of Regents exams for standardized assessment students, including ELLs. February- Spring semester and continuation of STEAM-based thematic instruction, including accessibility for ELLs; Chinese New Year celebration and Black history Month March- Administration of NYSAA for alternate assessment students, including ELLs; women from other cultures April- Introduction to NYSESLAT and data pertaining to ELLs May- Multicultural Awareness, including Latino, Asian, and Arabic custom; Haitian Flag Day. June- Academic Wrap-up examining data gleaned from the entire school year, including performances by ELLs. Teachers are required to fulfill their mandated professional development through web-casting and by attending professional development given by the District 75 Office of English Languages and DELLSS. Workshops provided by these two entities incorporate CCLS-aligned and NGLS-aligned instruction. Weekly school professional development presentations include STEAM, MoSL and MoTP, Co-teaching, Educational Field Trips, and Looking at Student Work. All workshops are planned with the intent of increasing academic rigor for all students, including ELLs. The ESL liaison distributes data about the performance of our ELLs and engages the staff in examining the student work of our ELLs. Professional development was presented on the first day of returning to school in September 2018 about the requirements of CR Part 154. This information is integral to the weekly meetings of the English department. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR Part 154, for all teachers 15% of the required professional development hours focuses on ELL strategies. 50% of the required professional development hours for the ENL teacher focuses on ELL strategies. Our professional development plan includes topics and issues relevant to our ELLs: looking at student work; adapting alternate assessment curricula for ELLs; writing strategies for ELLs; integrated ESL instruction. Our content area teachers find that many of the ENL methodologies, strategies, and techniques are helpful. Also, our ENL and content teachers are encouraged to attend professional developments and conferences offered by District 75 Office of English Language Learners, TESOL organizations, and TESOL academic institutions. The ENL teacher and the ESL Liaison turnkey all information from any workshops that they attend throughout the school year. Records of attendance at professional development workshops are kept by teachers in the professional development binders with copies submitted to the payroll secretary for inclusion in each teacher's professional file. The pupil accounting secretary collaborates with the Language Allocation Team to assure translation of essential documents and correspondence. In an effort to bring ELLs to the forefront of the school's focus, Bilingual Spanish counselors, bilingual Haitian-Creole counselors, and the ESL teacher are part of the Pupil Personnel Team. 2018-19 CEP 49  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent/Teacher conference, IEP meetings and orientations, the school ensures that ENL teachers periodically reach out to, communicate with, and meet with the ELL parents. They discuss goals of the program, their children's language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents are provided with interpreters in their languages, if requested or required. Parents are reminded that they may request a re-identification process/review any time within 45 days of enrollment in the NYCDOE. This is also communicated in writing within 5 days of enrollment, advising the parents that the child is entitled to ENL instruction. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All records pertaining to the annual individual meetings with ELL parents are kept in a binder in the main office. Information is also kept in ATS (iLog). The parent coordinator includes the parents of ELLs in all parental activities: luncheons; meet and greet events; family fun day; transition workshops. Communication is provided in both the preferred language and English, Translation is provided by the bilingual staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Communication takes place in writing and by telephone. ELL parental involvement is fostered through outreach activities in the home language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all opportunities, including participation in our inclusive programs at Clara Barton High School and Urban Action Academy, Transition Opportunity Program (TOP) after-school employment, community work-based learning, and Summer Youth Employment (SYEP). 2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yvrose Pierre, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn School for Career Dev School DBN: 75K753 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Yvrose Pierre Title Principal Dr. Bri-anne Alleyne Assistant Principal Jiselle Thomas Parent Coordinator Dr. A. Saad Ahmed ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. de la Rosa Parent Roman Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Tahirah Francois Barbara Aronson Coach Coach Luis Dorado School Counselor Ketler Louissaint Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Michael Connelly Other Speech Therapist Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 10/01/18 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K753 School Name: BSCD Superintendent: K. Louissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jiselle Barbara Bri-Anne Thomas Aronson Alleyne Parent Coordinator Data Specialist Assistant Principal No No No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school uses a composite approach to assess and determine the language of preference (written and oral) of each of our ELL parents: reviewing Part 3 of the home language survey forms, emergency cards, ATS reports (including RAPL and RPOB), and interactions with parents. We compile and maintain a language preference document identified by ELL names and their respective languages of preference. This information is shared with teachers and staff members who work with our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Haitian-Creole Chinese 264 22 3 2 2 90.8 6.8 1.0 0.7 0.7 264 22 3 2 2 90.8 6.8 1.0 0.7 0.7 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Calendars Monthly Sept 2018 -June 2019 Parent-teacher conference notices November 2018 & March 2019 After-school program permission slips October 2018 NYS Regents exam schedules January 2019, June 2019, August 2019 Holidays/school closings as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 PTA Notices as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation requests forms for Bengali, Chinese, Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Staff translation for Spanish (students at main site only) Staff translation for Spanish (students at main site only) Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish 2018-19 CEP 54  Parent Coordinator communuications as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 Special events as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 Field trip permission slips as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 Report cards every 5 weeks Oct 2018 - June 2019 Graduation packets February 2019 Promotion-in-doubt Letters December 2018 and May 2019 IEP Meetings & re-evaluations as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 School Parent Surveys Spring 2019 Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Staff translation for Spanish (no expected graduates have home languages other than Spanish and English) Staff translation for Spanish (students at main site only) Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Translation request forms for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; available in Spanish 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 IEP Meetings as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 Disciplinary meetings as needed Sept 2018 - June 2019 Monthly parental workshops as needed Sept 2018- June 2019 interpretation service(s)? Over-the-phone interpretation for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Over-the-phone interpretation for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Over-the-phone interpretation for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish Over-the-phone interpretation for Bengali, Chinese, and Haitian-Creole; staff translation for Spanish 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 55  In the event of an emergency, staff members speak Spanish and Haitian-Creole, respectively. The translation unit would be asked to support us with over-the-phone interpretation in Bengali and Chinese. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A segment of our Election Day professional development will be dedicated to sharing language access requirements and resources along with use of translation services . Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school fulfills parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by displaying the multilingual Welcome Poster, providing our staff with instructions on accessing over-the-phone interpretation, and translating all correspondence into the parents' preferred written languages, as indicated by RCPL. To the greatest extent possible, brochures and other print materials are translated into the parents' preferred written languages. Translation to Spanish is completed by bilingual staff members. Translation to the other preferred languages is requested via Translation Request Forms. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school spares no effort in gathering feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Some of our mechanisms in this effort include the use of our school parents’ survey and formal and informal interviews. Our parent coordinator disseminates the surveys to parents following workshops or school visits. In addition, we send surveys home to parents to obtain their feedback. We also gather feedback information via formal and informal parent interviews at school and/or over the phone. The School Parent Surveys are available in Spanish. If they are not available in the other preferred languages, Translation Request Forms will be submitted. 2018-19 CEP 56 
