2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K821 School Name: SUNSET PARK PREP Principal: JENNIFER SPALDING 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Sunset Park Prep 331500010821 Grade 6 – Grade 8 School Number (DBN): 15K821 4004 4 th Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11232 718-840-1951 718-840-1962 Phone Number: Fax: Jennifer Spalding jspalding@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jennifer Spalding Lauren Bowden MirnaZea Mark Waka TBD N/A N/A District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Brooklyn, NY 11201 askop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-4317 Phone Number: 718-935-4356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Room 505 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 347-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-2587 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Spalding Lauren Bowden MirnaZea Claudia Romero LisandraRivera Marilyn Franco *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member Member/8 th Grade Rep Member/7 th Grade Rep 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Samantha Santiago Mark Waka Lauren Scott TBD Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/6 th Grade Rep Member/ Chairperson Member/ Assistant Principal Parent Engagement Committee Member Parent Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? OUR VISION and KEY AREAS OF FOCUS Sunset Park Prep is a model community school where all students experience high levels of educational success, readying them for high school and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 9  1. All students engage in purposeful, differentiated, standards-based instruction that ignites intellectual curiosity and prepares students for high school. 2. All students receive direct, cohesive, cross-curricular writing and reading instruction in all content areas. 3. All students feel safe and welcome, with access to a wide-range of enrichment opportunities to foster growth and social-emotional development. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Sunset Park Prep was established to meet the needs of highly motivated, high achieving students. Our school is in the heart of the Sunset Park community and are truly representative of the neighborhood we serve, appealing to a diverse population of students and their families. We provide a rigorous, standards-based program in a small school setting, assuring a safe and nurturing environment for our students, staff and families. With particular attention to the adolescent, we believe that it is our responsibility to foster self-awareness, respect, intellectual curiosity, and a strong value system for each of our students. Our staff is a community of highly trained professionals who engage in ongoing professional development in order to provide the students with the highest quality education available. All the members of the Sunset Park Prep community are committed to building a culture where students, staff and families support each other in our efforts to ensure that an atmosphere of teaching and learning flourishes. STRENGTHS OF PARTICULAR NOTE At Prep, we have a great deal to celebrate. If polling staff members and students about our school, the word most frequently spoken would be “family,” and we pride ourselves on the nurturing, safe, and supportive environment we have created. While many of our successes are explained in greater detail Section 5, a few areas of celebration include the following: Academic  English Language Arts reading intervention program for every student once per week  Introduction to Technology class for 6 th grade, fully implemented technology program in 7 th and 8 th grade, supported by our Technology Coach Instruction in the Arts for all grades – 6 th grade visual art, 7 th grade drama/theater and dance, 8 th grade music   Regents Exams offered in Living Environment and Integrated Algebra. In 2018, we had a 98.5% pass rate on  the Living Environment Regents and a 98.5% pass rate on the Algebra I Common Core Regents. Spanish Proficiency offered to 8 th grade students following two years of differentiated Spanish language instruction. Student Life  Variety of after-school enrichment opportunities offered to students throughout the year – from choir, rock  band, crochet club, and theater troupe to morning basketball, soccer club, half-marathon team and our award-winning running club to gardening, Russian, and game design – to serve a wide variety of student interests and talents. For the past two years, our award-winning Patriots running club selected members to compete in the Brooklyn Half Marathon after intensive, year-long training. The team as a whole competed in over 25 races throughout the year. In June 2015, the Patriots won 1 st place in the Young Runners Championship and a member of our club won the Male Young Runner of the Year award. One of our male students won the Male 2018-19 CEP 10   Young Runner of the Year award again in 2018, and over 10 students won scholarships to summer running camp. In 2018, our Science Olympiad Team placed third in the regional competition and once again competed in the state tournament. In 2017, our Science Olympiad Team was the New York City regional champion and headed again to state. Since our inaugural team finished in the top three at Regionals in 2015 and went to the state competition in 2015, we have attended the state competition every year.  To encourage more student voice and participation in decision making at Prep, we regularly have over 150 applicants and 76 students given student jobs – ranging from Technology Liaisons (help with Tech Equipment in each class) and Communications Director (responsible for updating the student board) to School Librarians and Word of the Month Wizards. Student Council puts decision making, planning, and community building in the hands of student leaders.   Peer Mediators are expertly trained facilitators who help students resolve conflict peacefully.  Our Poconos Science Trip is a three-day, two-night, heavily subsidized experience open to 6 th and 7 th graders where students learn to track animals, paddle a canoe, hike, explore pond and stream ecology, and much more  Our Washington D.C. Trip is a three-day, two-night, heavily subsidized experience open to 8 th graders where students explore our nation’s capitol after months of research and preparation Teacher Life Frequent Department Meetings and Grade Meetings.  Common Planning period designated in every teacher’s schedule.   Professional Development calendar includes focused PD cycles, committee work, and Data Teams.  Teacher-led Professional Development series during a monthly “Unconference”.  Collaborative time to plan across contents, grade during “Planning for the Month”.  Every teacher meeting is memorialized using a note-taking template, reviewed by administration for important information and answers to posed questions, if applicable. Parent Life  Parents have access to their student’s grades and progress real-time, using our online gradebook through PupilPath.  Monthly calendar sent home and regular calls made using School Messenger via our Parent Coordinator.  Workshops offered regularly, on topics ranging from technology and protecting children online to immigration, domestic abuse, and health with various experts throughout the community presenting.  Regular parent events such as International Night (a culminating event of Global Awareness Week), Arts Showcase, Family Soccer Night, and our Block Party. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.  While our students consistently make progress on state exams, we aim to raise proficiency for all students on the exams and have particularly focused on reading and writing, as a majority of our students are former English Language Learners (ELLs) or current ELLs. In 2017, we opened a Transitional Bilingual Education class to serve the needs of students coming to us from neighborhood bilingual programs.   We aim to refine our targeted intervention systems to best assist long-term ELLs, students with disabilities (SWDs), and at-risk students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  AREAS OF CHALLENGE As a Title I school in District 15, we work tirelessly to ensure our students receive the best instruction, enrichment opportunities, and educational environment. Academic  While our students consistently make progress on state exams, we aim to raise proficiency for all students on the exams and have particularly focused on reading and writing, as a majority of our students are former English Language Learners (ELLs) or current ELLs.  We aim to refine our targeted intervention systems to best assist long-term ELLs, students with disabilities (SWDs), and at-risk students.  We have knowledgeable, hard-working teachers and through continued growth in their practice, we can elevate the level of discourse and achievement in classrooms. Student Life  We strive to continue to increase our enrichment opportunities with the hope that every student experiences an extracurricular activity that catches his or her interest. Teacher Life  Through continued support for teacher growth, cultivating a culture of joy, and helping teachers find more time to meet the many challenging demands of the position, we believe student successes will multiply. Parent Life  Parents are satisfied with their students’ lives at Prep, confident in sending their students to us, and comfortable reaching out to us, but we would like more parents in the doors at events, working in partnership with us to ensure student success. GROWTH FROM 2013 to PRESENT in KEY AREAS OF FOCUS  Teachers are smartly planning units with definitive start and end dates, aligned to the CCLS and incorporating writing and projects to bring curriculum to life. All teachers have posted to our curriculum mapping site and ICT teachers are working with content teachers to differentiate units prior to teaching. Teachers have attended professional development on planning, technology, examining student work, action planning, and ESL, with action plans on how to incorporate these experiences into classroom action. This year, we aim to deepen that work through analyzing unit and daily lesson plans in teams, and measuring the effectiveness of lessons through assessment.  All classrooms have libraries and students are reading for 30 minutes or more at home. We have seen increased comprehension with non-fiction texts, and a better ability to create arguments and draw evidence from non-fiction. Students are writing in all content areas, and we have seen an increase in stamina and volume, as well as higher student scores on writing rubrics as the year has progressed. This year, we hope to have students writing at a level 3 on grade-wide rubrics by the end of the year and all students experiencing reading growth of 1.5 years or more.  We have increased enrichment opportunities steadily year after year by over 55% since 2012 and have established a baseline for discipline data last year through our referral system/discipline tracker, section sheet comment tracking, and suspensions. Next year, we aim to maintain our current enrichment opportunities and 2018-19 CEP 12  expand partnerships to offer at least two new enrichment opportunities in the technology or arts field, broadening our continued focus on STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math). 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K821 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 504 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 16.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 77.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.1 2% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 40.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 98 98 95.3% 3.2% 23.6% 0.8% 17.9% 0.0% 0 23% 6.9 37.0% 52% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a Title I school in District 15, we work tirelessly to ensure our students receive high quality instruction meeting and exceeding that of other schools in the district, borough, and city. We believe that through more comprehensive, purposeful, and data-driven instruction we can better prepare students for high school and beyond. With the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards and an increasing focus on reading comprehension and writing in all subject areas, we found the most recent round of State tests revealed our students remain under-prepared for the greater demands of reading and writing on both the ELA and math exam. (WILL UPDATE WITH CURRENT STATS ONCE RELEASED) In 6 th grade, 21% of our students scored a 3 or 4 on the State ELA exams, and 37% scored a 3 or 4 on the State Math exams, compared to an average of 36% percent (ELA) and 39% (math) of 6 th graders in District 15. A more favorable comparison is to contrast against proficiency scores in Brooklyn where 25% (ELA) and 34% (math) of 6 th grade students received a proficient score (3 or 4) on the exams. The same comparisons are true for 7 th and 8 th : 7 th Grade at Prep: 17% (ELA), 26% (math) 7 th Grade in District 15: 40% (ELA), 42% (math) 7 th Grade in Brooklyn: 27% (ELA), 31% (math) 8 th Grade at Prep: 28% (ELA), 8% (math) – appears low due to the number of students who took and passed the Regents 8 th Grade in District 15:40% (ELA), 22% (math) 8 th Grade in Brooklyn: 29% (ELA), 24% (math) In 2013 - 2014, we focused on the foundational skill of unit planning. Teachers created plans, posted plans to our online curriculum mapping site, and used these plans as a mechanism for collaboration. This year, in analyzing our scores against individual student data and in-class data, we found that often our students’ reading levels, while growing, still limited their access to information at the level we had hoped. Furthermore, in both our observation data 2018-19 CEP 15  and teachers’ own self-reflections, we discovered not enough time was allocated for students’ independent practice and self-reflection. As a result, in 2014 – 2015 we began our work on questioning and discussion techniques. We trained staff members to leverage essential questions at the unit planning level and doubling student practice time – or “active thinking minutes” - in daily lessons. While we first begin with professional development around what questioning and discussion looked like in middle school, for 2015 – 2016 we worked on actively planning for this in classrooms. In 2016 - 2017, we shifted our focus to building our assessment practice and then using data to craft lessons that better met the needs of students. We continued this work in 2017 - 2018, with a specific focus on high-quality feedback, action planning around assessment results, and creating high-quality common assessments. In 2018 - 2019, we will be circling back to lesson design, combining our work over the last 5 years to (1) enhance our practice through the use of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) (2) practice more culturally responsive teaching practices to ensure the needs of ALL students are met and ALL students are engaged. We will then capitalize on our assessment work to continue to measure student understanding and the results of our enhanced teaching practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Implement UDL and culturally responsive teaching practices with all staff members by the end of the year, ensuring each teacher can use evidence to indicate student performance prior to the end of a unit. This goal is part of our vision to engage students in purposeful, differentiated, standards-based instruction that ignites intellectual curiosity and prepares students for high school and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in purposeful, strategic professional development, which upholds our community norms and builds trust among staff, to shift mindsets and build knowledge of how varied assessment is a critical component to the lesson planning process and how to implement assessment in the classroom. Align Data Team work to assessment in an effort to leverage research and peer support to design and execute quality assessments and data-informed instruction while also studying specific student sub-groups, such as ESL students and students with disabilities. Develop and implement a system to improve students’ IEPs and the IEP process by assisting teachers in both shifting mindsets and building knowledge on students' levels of performance through professional development, lunch-and-learns, and targeted support. Teachers Teachers Teachers Use assessment data to inform Academic Intervention Committee aims of developing a comprehensive academic intervention system while also enhancing teacher skills. Students and Teachers Admin (Principal and AP) and coaches Data Team Lead, Lead Teachers, with Admin and department head support Special Education Coordinator, Admin Started in September 2013, ongoing Started in September 2015, ongoing Started in October 2014, ongoing Started in June 2017, launch system in September 2017 Academic Intervention Committee (teachers, SPED and ESL coordinators, admin) and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will introduce our curriculum, an overview of CCLS, and our theory on rigor at Back to School Night, and engage in workshops throughout the year to support parents in supporting these skills in our students. These workshops will include our STEAM and Literacy Evening and Family Arts Festival. We will expand the work of our Diversity and Community Committee, growing more parent involvement and education opportunities about this important topic. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  1. All teachers will engage in professional development during our Monday professional development time. Teacher team leaders will helm grade team meetings. The Principal’s Cabinet, consisting of the Principal, AP, and Dean, the Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Special Education Coordinator, and four teacher-leaders will prioritize these initiatives with support and allotment of time. The AP and Principal will oversee teacher meetings, review Unit Plans, conduct observations, and provide feedback. A Teachers College staff developer will be on site 25 days this year. A variety of subject area teachers and service providers will attend workshops at Teachers College for a total of 25 calendar days. Teachers College Inclusive Classrooms Project (TCICP) will work with staff members during 10 days of the school year, using UDL to plan and implement units. TCICP will also conduct two, half day workshops for all staff members throughout the course of the year. As a school, we will follow-up on our Border Crossers training from spring 2018. The Principal and on-staff coach will be using the leadership slots to participate in a coaching course. 2. All teachers will engage in Data Teams during our Monday professional development time. 3. The Special Education Coordinator will execute professional development, lunch and learns, and targeted support for ALL teachers as they continue to improve our IEP process. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-year review will indicate that all teachers have (1) planned and revised units using UDL practices (2) completed Border Crossers training, read Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain, and engaged in discussions based on this text (3) engaged in a Data Team cycle to analyze lesson plans, student work, and assessments which lead to revisions of unit and/or daily lesson plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher self-reflections, Data Team products and note-taking templates, teacher perception surveys on the value of assessment, and Danielson ratings on assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? While we are a school with few incidents and suspensions, we recognize that to maintain this culture we must be proactive. We are committed to fostering an environment built on mutual respect. We pride ourselves on being a school that feels like a tight-knit community. We encourage our students to be a part of our community in the actions they take and the way they treat others. With increasing media attention on bullying, cyber-bullying, and self-esteem because of the prevalence of these issues in all schools, we strive to ensure students feel safe, welcome, and supported at Prep. When it comes to maintaining a supportive environment, our priority is to create and sustain systems and activities that build our school community. We have a number of internal structures to support our school community, and we use these structures to gather important data points to drive our work. ● Section Sheet ● Peer Mediation Referral System ● School-Wide Detention System ● Discipline Referral System ● Community Violations System For the past 7 years, we have been strengthening our social emotional supports and program at Prep. We presently do the following:  Peer Mediation Program – approximately 20 students are interviewed and selected to help facilitate agreements in student to student conflict. Our program is unique in many ways, most notably in that our Assistant Principal oversees the program, any grade student can mediate conflict between any grade student, and teacher/student conflicts have also been mediated.  Advisory – All students receive one period of advisory per week. We teach skills in advisory to help students self-manage and solve conflicts peacefully. As of 2015, advisory is now in groups of less than 15 on the grade.  Partnership with Morningside Center for Social Responsibility - Our staff developer supports our advisory teachers and peer mediators, as well as conducting observations with a SEL rubric and providing feedback to teachers. Smart School Leaders – The principal is part of a cohort who gather quarterly to discuss SEL in schools, visit sites, and engage in professional development around cutting edge topics in the SEL community.   Word of the Month, Question of the Week (WoMQoW) which is a vocabulary, SEL, and writing activity completed each week in homeroom. Every month we focus on a complex word, with social-emotional weight, to use a jumping off point for discussion during homeroom class. New this year are two initiatives to make 2018-19 CEP 19   WoMQoW even more powerful – each homeroom will have a turn to create an art display embodying a word and everyone homeroom will compete in a door competition Student Council puts decision making, planning, and community building in the hands of student leaders, which includes an Executive Council (a team of 7 elected students) and a Student Congress (an elected representative from every homeroom).  Enrichment opportunities, trips, and events create opportunities for student involvement beyond the classroom.  A partnership with the Center for Family Life led to a comprehensive arts CBO housed in our basement which offers in-school partnerships with teaching artists and an after-school arts program from 3 – 6 pm every day for students.  A partnership with Lutheran Medical Center supports students through a social work office, in-house helath clinic, and a dental office. In the past two years, we have implemented the following:  Community Violations resulting in Community Service – If a student violates the expectations of our community, they are given a task that requires them to serve the community.  Discipline Advisory Committee – This committee of teachers was developed in response to discussions about our discipline philosophy, and out of a teacher desire to start a school-wide detention system. The principal serves as a member of this committee. New this year, the group will also read a book each quarter, in an addition to our article share from last year, in order to glean additional ideas and resources about this field of study. School-Wide Detention – We have a school-wide, after-school detention system wherein students given detention in class are entered into our online system; the office contacts the parents to receive permission; and the student stays after-school the same day to fill out a reflection under the supervision of a teacher. Suspension Re-entry Meetings – In the spirit of restorative justice, students who have been suspended are welcomed back into our community prior to returning to class. The student’s teachers, and occasionally parents and other students, attend this meeting in which we talk about what happened and figure out a plan for what will be different moving forward.    Collegial Meditations - Born of a desire to better understand the process of mediation, interested teachers have volunteered to serve as collegial mediators and assist teachers who are in conflict with other teachers. We have found mediation helps empower students to solve their own problems and it has the power to help adults reach out for assistance when involved in professional conflicts as well.  Prep Strikes and Acts of Service - Created to help us better inform families of students of their behavior progress, certain accumulations of section sheet comments, detentions, or even suspensions result in a Prep Strike. Prep Strikes can be removed through Acts of Service.  Prep Values - the Instructional Cabinet team worked throughout the 2017 - 2018 school year to identify the values we want all Prep students to graduate with. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Ensure students feel safe and welcome, with access to a wide-range of enrichment opportunities to foster growth and social-emotional development, by: (1) maintaining a comprehensive discipline system; (2) increasing the number of enrichment opportunities for students by the end of the year as measured by the School Survey, Peer Mediation data, and our in-house record-keeping systems; 2018-19 CEP 20  (3) measuring the effect of Culturally Responsive Teaching on student behavior in class, through the monitoring of our Section Sheet data; (4) raise awareness of diversity and cultural issues through affinity groups: Asian Student Alliance, a Hispanic Student Alliance, and a Middle Eastern Student Alliance, as well as Diversity and Community Committee which consists of members of each of the alliances (both students and teachers). (5) implement a Peer Counselor program as an extension of our Peer Mediation work. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Maintain a streamlined system for collecting Peer Mediation data live-action throughout the year. All teachers will benefit Maintain the number of enrichment opportunities and enhance the means by which those opportunities are disseminated to students and parents. Students & Teachers Develop and implement a more comprehensive system for student affinity groups/alliances. Students & Teachers Create Peer Counselor program Students AP, Principal, Dean Admin, teachers Admin, Dean, Community and Diversity Committee Members, ESL Coordinators, and Language Acquisition Committee Admin, Dean Team Started in September 2014, ongoing Started in September 2014, ongoing Begin with Community Days in September By the middle of October, have Peer Counselor Program up and running 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will introduce our comprehensive social-emotional program at Back to School Night, and engage in workshops throughout the year to support parents in supporting these skills in our students, as well as growing our diversity and community work with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our system must be maintained and an AP’s time must be dedicated to maintaining the system. Time in meetings and space in communications must be made available to further promote and educate students and teachers on Peer mediation referrals. All teachers will engage in committee work during professional work time. The Joy Committee will need resources – both monetary and time – implement school-wide events. Per session must be made available to teachers willing to helm enrichment opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-year review will indicate a 10% increase in the number of Peer Mediations, reflective of student’s social-emotional growth and ability to solve conflicts independently, with a 20% decrease in the rate of recidivism. Our affinity/alliance work will continue, with students reporting a feeling of greater connection and understanding on our student survey. Our Peer Counselor Program will be created. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Peer Mediation Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a Title I school in District 15, we work tirelessly to ensure our students receive high quality instruction meeting and exceeding that of other schools in the district, borough, and city. Through collaboration, which is a core value among our teachers, staff, and administration, we can push continuous quality improvement. With the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards and an increasing focus on reading comprehension and writing in all subject areas, we found the most recent round of State tests revealed our students remain under-prepared for the greater demands of reading and writing on both the ELA and math exam. WILL UPDATE DATA WITH 2018 RESULTS! In 6 th grade, 21% of our students scored a 3 or 4 on the State ELA exams, and 37% scored a 3 or 4 on the State Math exams, compared to an average of 36% percent (ELA) and 39% (math) of 6 th graders in District 15. A more favorable comparison is to contrast against proficiency scores in Brooklyn where 25% (ELA) and 34% (math) of 6 th grade students received a proficient score (3 or 4) on the exams. The same comparisons are true for 7 th and 8 th : 7 th Grade at Prep: 17% (ELA), 26% (math) 7 th Grade in District 15: 40% (ELA), 42% (math) 7 th Grade in Brooklyn: 27% (ELA), 31% (math) 8 th Grade at Prep: 28% (ELA), 8% (math) – appears low due to the number of students who took and passed the Regents 8 th Grade in District 15:40% (ELA), 22% (math) 8 th Grade in Brooklyn: 29% (ELA), 24% (math) In analyzing our scores against individual student data and in-class data, we found that many of our students, most of whom are former ELLs, struggle mightily with higher level reading comprehension and the written expression of ideas. Many times, it is not because the idea is not present, but because the structure, mechanics, response length are not adequate. We believe that through a more consistent and direct method of reading and writing instruction, practice 2018-19 CEP 24  in all subject areas, and the use of technology to facilitate reading and writing, students will become better readers and writers, thereby increasing their scores on state exams. In 2013 - 2014, we focused on ensuring 100% of ELA classrooms have engaging, leveled libraries, content areas have rich non-fiction libraries, all teachers attend Common Planning meetings each week, and common writing rubrics were available. In 2014 - 2015, we implemented (1) a targeted mechanics/non-fiction reading class design to pull from other contents to increase student exposure and skills in navigating non-fiction (2) created an ELA intervention block with targeted support from related service providers and F-status literacy specialists. In 2015 - 2016, we worked toward creating a menu of options for Common Planning time that would help teachers better plan and produce together, with the goal of elevating student success through collaborative, cohesive work. A major component of this work was using the various protocols during school-wide professional development, and then turning over these protocols to teachers for regular use. In 2016 - 2017 we continued with our Common Planning and grew our weekly Grade Team Meetings to house our Data Team work. As a result, we saw an increase in collaborative, horizontal planning of project-based learning and and shared best practices. In 2017 - 2018, scheduled more horizontal and vertical time to analyze unit and lesson plans, review student assessment data, and plan to improve student outcomes through more collaborative, project-based learning. One of the key areas where we continue to see teacher collaboration is through our committee and speciality committee work. Our committees include: Joy Committee, Student Support Service Committee, Parent Engagement (Family FUN!) Committee, Diversity and Community Committee, Wellness Committee, Fundraising Committee, College and Career Readiness Committee, and the Language Acquisition/Newcomer Committee. Our speciality committees are consultative with administration, and include the following committees: Academic Intervention Committee, Discipline Advisory Committee, and Hiring Committee. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Provide direct, cohesive, cross-curricular, authentic, writing and reading in all content areas by ensuring teachers opportunities for collaboration through a structured Common Planning period every week, in which every teacher is engaged in this process and creates an independent, cross-curricular project week by the end of the year. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to fine-tune a Reading Intervention block in ELA each week, allowing service providers and literacy specialists to both serve struggling readers, ESL students, and Students with Disabilities and also push students in need of enrichment by leveraging small groups and targeted skills and strategies. Teachers and Students Started in September 2014, ongoing Continue the use of Google Apps for education into student and teacher life, with the goal of fostering collaboration between teachers on planning and projects, and among students on class work, homework, and projects. Teachers Collaboratively plan a cross-curricular independent project week pilot by the end of the year. Program Common Planning, Grade Teams, and Department Teams to have sufficient time to strategically test and reflect on collaboratively planning efforts. Teachers and Students Implement Academic Intervention plan for students, created in a combined effort from the Academic Intervention Committee, Student Support Services Committee, Instructional Cabinet, and Cabinet. Teachers Started in Spring 2013, ongoing Started in spring 2015, completed by spring 2019 October 2018 Lead by ELA Lead Teacher and literacy specialists, supported Admin and Teachers College Staff Developer Lead by Technology Coach, Principal Lead by model teachers, supported by Admin Admin, teachers supporting Academic Intervention, committees supporting Academic Intervention 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. While we will introduce this concept at Back to School Night, and engage in workshops throughout the year to support parents in supporting these skills in our students, parents will best see this in action at our Parent Engagement time, best hear about it at School Leadership Team, and see it happen at our Parent Events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. All teachers will engage in professional development during our Monday professional development time. Programmatically, our ELA intervention block was scheduled over the summer for teachers and service providers. Two F-status literacy specialists were hired to divide up and support the work. Also, additional books for guided reading and books clubs were purchased. 2. All Departments have Common Planning (CP) time, scheduled by grade and subject area, built into their programs to examine CCLS standards, share best practices, devise common strategies, study student work and progress, and actively collaborate. All subject area and ICT teachers also use CP time to ensure information is accessible to students, and the differentiation section of the unit plan is thoroughly completed in the template. 3. We have prioritized spending on technology. For 2015 – 2016, our technology teacher moved from full-time classroom work to a part-time teaching/part-time coaching role, wherein he not only tackles larger issues of tech and provides technology PD, but he also observes teachers, supports them in teaching with technology, and helps teachers develop technology systems. We purchased nearly 200 new pieces of technology (Chromebooks, iPads, and iPad minis) and in 2015, used our Reso A grant to revitalize our technology lab into a maker space. All classrooms have mounted SmartBoards. We have been using Edmodo and Google Classroom widely – all students have a Gmail account (@sunsetparkprep.com) and have been introduced to Google Drive in technology class to ensure students are savvy on how to use free, web-based word processing, spreadsheets, and presentations to complete projects. 4. We will focus our past Learning Partners resources on developing a model Independent Project Week, led by our model teachers, to help increase collaborative efforts of staff and engaged students in self-driven project work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-year review will reveal: (1) reading level data will indicate that at least 80% of students in the lowest third, served in Reading Intervention, will have advanced by at least one grade level (2) the planning of Independent Project Week is underway with one grade team in the throes of planning, and on schedule to see the fruition of the work. (3) Academic Intervention is fully launched, with data to measure the program's effectiveness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading level data, Meeting notes from grade, department, Model Teacher, and Common Planning meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school staff, we generated a s hared a vision and remain committed to three student outcomes: 1. All students engage in purposeful, differentiated, standards-based instruction that ignites intellectual curiosity and prepares students for high school. 2. All students receive direct, cohesive, cross-curricular writing and reading instruction in all content areas. 3. All students feel safe and welcome, with access to a wide-range of enrichment opportunities to foster growth and social-emotional development. To support this work, the principal works to nurture teacher growth, strengthen instructional delivery, and support teachers in their social-emotional development. Teacher Growth  In 2013 – 2014, we worked to change the culture of observations through pre-work on Danielson which included text protocols with 1e and 3c, teacher self-ratings, teacher self-reflections.  Principal and AP, along with coaches, developed a standard observation template and note for use in all observations.  Completed in-person debriefs throughout the year for both informal and formal observations.  Beginning in 2013 and continuing this year, the principal and APs normed using videos and completed the first weeks of visits and ratings together.  Extended Administration morning check-ins occur every Friday morning with administrators reviewing write-ups and reviewing record keeping systems. In each round of observations, two administrators complete co-observations to ensure continued norming   Teachers completed self-ratings and reflections throughout 2013 – 2014, and continue to complete these three times per year. These inform the Summative Conferences and serve as a starting point in Initial Planning Conferences, where teacher self-ratings and reflections are compared against observation data to discover key leverage areas and generate teacher goals and benchmarks for the year. In response to last year’s teacher observation data (both self-ratings/reflections and observation data), the goal of developing questioning and discussion was generated after most teachers, even our most veteran teachers, were on the border of effective and developing.  Instructional Delivery  By the end of 2013 – 2014, 100% of ELA classrooms had leveled libraries and consistent systems for check-out. All content areas had non-fiction libraries and access to print articles such as Scholastic Jr, Upfront 2018-19 CEP 28    Magazine, etc. Additionally, all students reading levels were assessed using Running Records at least two times. In 2014 - 2015, all reading levels were assessed by mid-October, with the reading level data shared to all staff members. Reading Level data will also be collected by February 6 th and May 15 th . In analyzing state test results and our reading level information, and in consultation with our Teachers College staff developer, we have theorized that students need more small group instruction and guided practice to grow their reading levels. From this data, and the desire to move our students’ reading levels, we created the ELA Reading Intervention block.  With the elimination of Extended Time Services in 2014, we also created Math Intervention two times a week before school, lead by rotating math teachers as well as Study Hall, which occurs every day after school for 45 minutes and provides students with access to computers and a quiet place to work, overseen by an Assistant Principal.  With a greater desire for technology support, our tech teacher became our Technology Coach in 2015 – 2016. He moved from full-time classroom work to a part-time teaching/part-time coaching role, wherein he not only tackles larger issues of tech and provides technology PD, but he also observes teachers, supports them in teaching with technology, and helps teachers develop technology systems.  All contents are supported by a department head who facilitates Common Planning meetings, keep notes on the meetings, and turns meeting notes in to Admin who review.  Performance Assessments were given in 2013 – 2016 and collectively graded and analyzed to help inform instruction for the 2017 – 2018 school year.  Data Teams were introduced in 2014 - 2015 to leverage research and peer support in an effort to shift to better questioning, discussion, and student practice techniques while also studying specific student sub-groups, such as ESL students and students with disabilities. Social–Emotional Support  Communication is highly valued and executed through our weekly Staff Bulletin, Message of the Week and morning board, Cabinet Meetings, and All Staff Meetings.  At the beginning of each year, the staff creates meeting norms displayed in every meeting. All meeting, workshops and PDs must meet one of the three purposes for meetings at Prep: Does the meeting build community? Does the meeting help us grow professionally? Does the meeting solve a problem or make decisions? If not, then we do not have a meeting.  Constant feedback and teacher voice is paramount to all initiatives and every day work. Every meeting and professional development concludes with Plus/Delta, allowing teachers to name what they liked (plus) and what they would change (delta). Teachers may also anonymously submit feedback through the “Sound-Off” online form. Additionally, data on teacher preference and point-of-view is regularly gathered through pre-year, mid-year, pre-preference, and end-of-year surveys. The culture depends on open communication to solve issues.  Through feedback, Advisory classes for 2014 – 2015 were made smaller and additional teachers were programmed to support.  Community building exists in everyday interactions, communication, and purposeful Staff Meetings where our core values – purposeful, urgent and relentless, collaborative, innovative, reflective, and belief that all students can – are celebrated.  We have implemented a comprehensive discipline system. In consultation with the Discipline Advisory Committee, the Principal, AP, Dean, and Advisory teachers created a three-pronged approach to handling discipline issues at the middle school level. The strategy is to focus on consequences for behavior, social-emotional awareness, and community and connections to foster a safe and welcoming environment.  The Principal is a member of Morningside Center’s Smart School Leaders program. In 2013 – 2014 we brought back the Dean position and the AP helms the Peer Mediation Program, ensuring streamlined communication structures between discipline and social-emotional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Continue to support school growth by ensuring staff investment in the school vision, promoting open lines of communication and reciprocal feedback, and building a culture of trust and collaboration as measured by in-house surveys, feedback forms, and teacher self-reflections by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to align resources and programming to growth, instructional, and social-emotional goals, including maintaining lead teachers and coaches, instructional supports offered by staff developers, and programmatic feedback used to develop teacher schedules. School-wide Stakeholders Continuing from 2013, ongoing Principal, with input from Cabinet, teachers, and SLT Continue to distribute the weekly Staff Bulletin, update the message board for staff daily, update the message board for students weekly. Teachers and support staff Continuing from 2013, ongoing Provide opportunities for feedback with the mid-year survey, EoY survey, and Back to School survey, plus/delta after every meeting and professional development opportunity, and anonymous “Sound Off!” form. Teachers Leave observation notes after every classroom visit and conduct debrief conversations in a way that feels safe and growth-oriented. Teachers Continuing from 2013, ongoing Continuing from 2013, ongoing Principal with input from Cabinet (Staff Bulletin) and Students (Student Board) Admin Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our School Leadership Team is a partnership between admin, parents, and teachers. We hope that parents will attend our monthly meetings, ready our regular website updates, follow us on twitter, receive reports at home, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Continue to budget for two Lead Teacher positions (ELA and Math), Technology Coach position, Special Education support, Teachers College Staff Developer, and introduce the Teachers College Inclusive Classrooms Project (TCICP). Also, elicit feedback from staff surveys and end of the year conversations to inform programming choices for fall 2020. 2018-19 CEP 31  2. Continue to block off time in Cabinet Meetings to discuss upcoming staff bulletin, as well as time to compose the message, read educational articles, and craft the weekly message. 3. Make and improve upon surveys. 4. Norming process requires scheduled time from administrators to ensure consistency. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year survey results will show, at the mid-year review, that at least 85% of staff members will agree or strongly agree that our building operates on a culture of trust, administration is communicative and open to feedback, and administration actions are aligned to the school vision. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. When reviewing the Middle School Quality Snapshot, 97% of parents are satisfied with the education their child receives at Sunset Park Prep. We are incredibly proud of the environment we create and are happy parents trust us with their precious students. Parents are satisfied with their students’ lives at Prep, confident in sending their students to us, and comfortable reaching out to us, but we would like more parents in the doors at events, working in partnership with us to ensure student success. We are always looking for ways to increase opportunities for parents to be engaged in our school community. Last year, we implemented our first annual Back to School Night so parents could learn about curriculum in each subject area and provide support to students at home. We also began using an online grade system called PupilPath which allows students and parents to regularly check progress. This allows parents and student to measure progress, communicate with teachers, and see if they are properly preparing for high school and beyond. This year, we continued to expand our work with parent engagement. We closed out the 2013 – 2014 school year with a first ever new student orientation session for parents scheduled for the spring (rather than the summer) and saw our highest attendance yet - a practice which continues to yeild better and better results in 2015, 2016 and 2017. We continued with Back to School Night and PupilPath, and grew a very important committee – The Parent Engagement Committee – consisting of our parent coordinator and teachers. This committee planned a second annual Family Soccer Night which pitted students against parents in our gymnasium, with the PTA selling treats and a teacher soccer team relieving the parents for a match or two, the event was a huge success. The Parent Engagement Committee also added a first annual Family Basketball Night, as well as a June Block Party and BBQ in our school yard. Parents indicated they prefer phone communication over all other methods, with a note home lagging behind. We make regular calls using School Messenger, send home a monthly calendar, and call with attendance, lateness, and discipline issues. Our Parent Coordinator, in partnership with the PTA, SLT, and Admin offered workshops regularly on topics ranging from technology and protecting children online to immigration, domestic abuse, and health with various experts throughout the community presenting. Additionally, we provide regular parent events such as International Night (a culminating event of Global Awareness Week), Arts Showcase, Family Soccer Night, and Community Day. In 2015 - 2016, we rebuilt the school website and created a Twitter account to streamline communication with parents. We intend to build even more electronic communication methods for parents and students in 2017 - 2018. However, we have found a low percentage of parent engagement with sparse PTA attendance and workshop attendance, and low levels of attendance at arts events. Although we had 433 parents out of 515 students attend our Parent Teacher Conferences in November 2018, we struggle with enticing parents in the building for celebratory, academic, and arts related events. 2018-19 CEP 33  We leveraged our high Parent Teacher Conference attendance and offered a comprehensive parent survey to gather more information about the needs of our families and the obstacles to deeper parent engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Continue to build a school culture where parents are not only involved, but engaged in the school community and knowledgably support student academic achievement by doubling our offerings of celebratory, academic student events, community building events, and parent workshops. For previously existing events, we aim to increase parent attendance by at least 15 percent. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Aid in the establishment of a stronger PTA to help foster greater parent involvement in academic life. Parent, students, and teachers Started in June 2016, ongoing Parent Coordinator, Admin More regularly update the website with blog posts. Parents Continue to leverage the Parent Engagement Committee to plan and promote high-interest events to entice students and parents attendance at events after-school, particularly by linking the PTA to our Parent Engagement Committee, a practice which we started in 2016. Parents & Students Technology Coach, Parent Coordinator, Principal Parent Engagement Committee Started in June 2016, ongoing Started September 2014, ongoing Enhance our Parent Involvement Plan, enhance Parent Involvement sections to our school website, alternate PTA meetings between morning and evening, continue with our "Coffee with the Principal" series, and find small ways to help open our doors even more to parents through advance planning and engaging workshops/activities/trips. Parents Started in April 2017, ongoing Admin, teachers, Parent Engagement Committee, SLT, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Family Life and Lifelines, Wellness in the Schools Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. This will require time from the Parent Coordinator and Principal, and support from FACE, to ensure that our PTA is healthy and growing throughout the course of the year, as well as being well-supported by our school community. 2. Provide time for the Technology Coach to continue support the development of digital communication. 3. Per session opportunities for event planning and attendance by teachers. Continued time to meet with committees and plan events. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By our mid-year review, the Parent Engagement Committee and PTA will have together planned one new event and general attendance at parent events will increase 15% from the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School event calendar and parent attendance records from events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessments, student need, parent request, teacher observation, anecdotals Assessments, student need, parent request, teacher observation, anecdotals Assessments, student need, parent request, teacher observation, anecdotals Assessments, student need, parent request, teacher observation, anecdotals Assessments, student need, parent request, teacher observation, anecdotals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ACADEMIC INTERVENTION (new system established by committee), Study Hall, Tutorial, Reading Intervention Block, speech services, ESL services ACADEMIC INTERVENTION (new system established by committee), Study Hall, Tutorial, , Morning Math Intervention, Lunch Help ACADEMIC INTERVENTION (new system established by committee), Study Hall, Tutorial, Lunch Help, Regents Prep ACADEMIC INTERVENTION (new system established by committee), Study Hall, Tutorial Guidance Counselor, Lutheran Social Worker, and School Psychologist Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one Before, during, and after school Small group, one-to-one Before, during, and after school Small group, one-to-one Before, during, and after school Small group, one-to-one Before, during, and after school Small group, one-to-one During school 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide a number of services through our Guidance Counselor, who meets regularly with our STH population and assesses student need. In addition to raising funds to ensure all students have the opportunity to attend trips, events, and 8th grade activities, we also keep basic supplies - from school items like pens/pencils/notebooks to clothes and personal hygiene items - in stock for students. New this year: our students in Helping Hands and students performing Acts of Service have been planning to convert a paper storage closet into a "Prep Shop" for students coming from shelters and other students in need. The closet is in the design phase, but will be stocked with clothes, hygiene supplies, school supplies, and food. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are Title I - see above 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  We are Title I - see above 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are Title I - see above 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment Prep is fortunate to recruit through a number of sources, but most effectively we have great word of mouth. Many of the teachers we work with are referred to us by other teachers who presently work here. We get referrals from past and present teacher-leaders and coaches, and former employees. We also have a strong partnership with Teach for America and the Teaching Fellows, and have many veterans of those programs on staff for many years to come. Retention: We are able to retain great teachers because Prep is a wonderful place to work. We actively nurture our staff community and develop teachers daily. We believe that student development and academic excellence is at the center of all we do. Because we believe that all students can grow, learn, and be successful, we know the environment we create inside and outside our walls, in cooperation with families and the community, fosters achievement for all students. Our approach is purposeful, urgent and relentless, evidence-based, collaborative, and innovative. Through effective planning, accurate and on-going assessment, reflection, and continual drive for personal development to improve practice, we maintain great relationships among staff members and people stay and become a part of our community. Assignments: Preference sheets are accommodated to the best of our ability. Teachers consult with the principal at the end of every school year to discuss assignments for the coming year. Support: While we have two staff developers who spend a total of 45 days with us each year working on literacy and social-emotional learning, we also have two in-house coaches in ELA and Math. We have a Dean who supports and offers development on discipline techniques. Every new teacher receives an in-house mentor, as well as tremendous guidance from department teams, grade teams, committees, data teams, and nearby classrooms. Additionally, much of our teacher support is funneled through Danielson. We have weekly professional development opportunities that are teacher-led workshops on components of Danielson, offered because of patterns and trends observed in 2018-19 CEP 40  classrooms. We also offer staff development during all staff meetings and lunch. Teachers attend workshops at Teachers College, Morningside Center, and through the DOE. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have a comprehensive support system to help teachers and staff meet the CCSS. At the ground level, teachers spend time working with co-teachers and content teams to develop curriculum maps in Common Planning meetings. Teachers also use these curriculum maps in grade teams to plan cross-curricular projects and experiences to meet a variety of learning standards set out in the CCSS. Teachers and staff receive PD on CCSS at the beginning of the year, Election Day, and Brooklyn-Queens Day. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At Prep, we value collaborative decision making. Our MoSL Committee does a great deal to determine the state-wide and city-wide assessments. After seeking input from fellow teachers, the MoSL Committee meets to discuss the coming year’s assessments. For the past two years, the MoSL mantra has centered on using the fewest number of assessments feasible to measure student progress, as we believe this is best for our students. For example, this year we elected to not formally administer the Science and Social Studies Performance Assessments, although we found 2018-19 CEP 41  them informative last year. We have chosen to informally use them to gather information about student learning, and help us better prepare students in the spring for the Performance Assessments. Our professional development around assessment is two-fold – first, we whole-heartedly believe that data drives instruction and is deserving our attention. Thus, we are improving our practice around gathering and interpreting data though our data team initiative. Second, we will be continuing PD cycles around planning, engagement, and using assessment in instruction as our next benchmark. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $437,408 0 0 $12,366 $3,616,255 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, Part 4a No funding No funding No funding Section 5, Part 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 42  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Sunset Park Prep in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Sunset Park Prep will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● sharing information on community resources available to parents and families who need support beyond on walls; ● supporting ALL our families in whatever way we are able, with the understanding that our partnership is ultimately the best way to help our students be successful. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 45  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule at minimum quarterly parent meetings - with the aim of regular, monthly meetings - to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference known as Back to School Night, where parents can meet with teachers and hear specifically about the curriculum students will undertake in the coming year; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year, such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, Family STEAM and Literacy Night, Family Arts Festival, and more; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events such as Family Basketball Night, Family Soccer Night, Block Party and BBQ, International Night and more; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents in the Parent Coordinator's Office; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing access to our online gradebook system - PupilPath - during Back to School Night to keep parents appraised of student progress, in addition to providing quarterly written progress reports to keep parents informed of their children’s grades and conduct; ● developing and distributing regular online updates and online calendar via our website - www.sunsetparkprep.com - designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress, in addition to sending home a monthly printed calendar; ● providing a school agenda for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Sunset Park Prep, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 46  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA Act; ● providing classes beyond core content to help students explore their own creativity while also exposing them to art and necessary 21st century skills. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education, and whenever possible having staff members available to translate and foster a comfortable environment for communication ; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● providing staff with resources - fellow staff members available translation periods, the NYC DOE translation line services, and the translate content service via our online gradebook/parent communication tool known as "Pupilpath" - in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Family Events, Curriculum Events, and more. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 48  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Sunset Park Park Prep This school is (check one): DBN: 15K821 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 55 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III program proposed here for the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 school years aims to engage 40 ELL students in production of original journalistic work while targeting reading skills, developing academic vocabulary, non-fiction writing skills, interviewing techniques, and speaking competence. A majority of the ELLs at Sunset Park Prep (Grades 6,7,8) are advanced or intermediate, as demonstrated on the 2018 NYSESLAT Exam. These students' Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) are highly developed, but their Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) needs further improvement. Thus, we have determined that text analysis in research followed by written or oral (in the form of video news) production should be at the core of our program. The academic nature of texts (and language the students will encounter when conducting interviews), as well as the stories they produce that reflect targeted CALP, will facilitate development of Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency and non-fiction writing/public speaking skills. Our program offers a wide range of topics to explore developing linguistic competence and core content understandings simultaneously. Focus on current events and local news coverage will demand that students develop and apply skills built in ELA to analyze complex informational texts, sequence ideas and events, identify points of view, and many other skills crucial to success within the new Common Core standards. Students will further hone their analytical skills by examining topics centered on science, technology, city planning, budget decisions, and various other cognitively challenging subjects. Our website allows for written as well as video content to be posted and features local news pertaining to our neighborhood, borough, and school. The text and video segments produced by our ELL students are made available online to the entire student-body on a weekly to biweekly schedule, depending on the amount of editing required. Students also have the option of focusing on and national news, science, technology, city planning, as well as arts and entertainment, opinions pieces, restaurant reviews, and anything else the students and guiding teachers determine will develop academic language skills. For our beginner students, focus on basic questioning and reporting is more the focus. -----------------------------------------Subgroups and Grade Levels Served-------------------------------------------------- Our program will serve up to 40 ELLs within all grades at our school (6th, 7th, 8th). The students are split into two groups (both groups including 6th, 7th, and 8th graders as determined by proficiency level) for the instructional phases of each meeting. Students are grouped based on 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information data from formal assessments (e.g. NYSESLAT score, TC reading level, IEP data) as well as through review of student work and teacher recommendations. Essentially, students are grouped by language proficiency level rather than grade. When necessary, further instructional differentiation is employed within these two groups in order to meet the needs of all students in attendance. Our ‘lower-proficiency’ group is be slightly smaller than our ‘high-proficiency’ group, allowing for the teacher leading this group to offer a high level of individual support for these students. ----------------------------------------------------Schedule and Activities-------------------------------------------------------- Our program will meet Tuesdays and Thursdays from October 2nd through June 13th during the 2018-2019 school year. Meetings will take place between 3:00pm and 5:00pm. Below are the specific dates lined out by month and day: 10/2/18, 10/4/18, 10/9/18, 10/11/18, 10/16/18, 10/18/18, 10/23/18, 10/25/18, 10/29/18 11/1/18, 11/8/18, 11/13/18, 11/15/18, 11/20/18, 11/22/18, 11/27/18, 11/29/18 12/4/18, 12/6/18, 12/11/18, 12/13/18, 12/18/18 1/3/19, 1/8/19, 1/10/19, 1/15/19, 1/17/19, 1/22/19, 1/24/19, 1/29/19, 1/31/19 Tuesday Sessions (3:00pm-5:00pm): 2 teachers, 2 groups determined by proficiency level, English language Instruction Each Tuesday, ELLS in our program meets for two hours to analyze and discusses published articles, news broadcasts, or interviews, and then brainstorm ideas for topics to investigate and report on. During the guided analysis, the students cite key details in text media news or video news segments. Students then paraphrase and retell salient ideas, explore new vocabulary, and examine the grammar forms commonly used in news media (various verb tenses, passive voice, quoted speech, reported speech, etc.). Instruction also includes lessons focused on research practices (e.g. identifying credible sources, proper ways to cite sources, etc.) When analyzing the various forms of news media, the two teachers work in separate spaces with their groups on common topics to maintain continuity in focus for all learners throughout the program. The differentiated proficiency groups may watch different videos centered on the same topic, or view texts adapted at different lexile levels. Activities focused on vocabulary and building background schema before delving into the text are provided and differentiated to reflect the needs of the two groups. Students produce short, assessable responses during each of these guided analysis sessions. The brainstorming portion of our Tuesday sessions offers students a ‘menu’ of possible topics, but grant them agency to take the story in whatever direction they choose. Students may also suggest topics of their own if they are able to persuade other members of the ‘writing and editorial staff’ of its merit (this merit will be determined on the basis of whether the topic in engaging, appropriate, and can provide opportunity for development of academic skills). Students will research topics with any remaining time left during this session. Thursday Sessions (3:00pm-5:00pm): 2 ESL teachers, 2 groups determined by proficiency level, English language Instruction Each Thursday, students work on researching topics and synthesizing their work into a publishable/recordable product (a written article, narrated slideshow, news-desk report, video segment, etc.). The two ESL certified teachers present on Thursday offer individualized support to learners during this time by coaching their writing and speaking skills. During individual work, students receive consultation focused on written craft (grammar points, maintaining a journalistic tone, vocabulary in context, etc), or speaking (interviewing techniques, tone, pronunciation, etc.) The focus of these consultations is informed by the observations and assessments of teachers during previous sessions. Here again, the group is split into ‘High’ and ‘Low’ to ensure that instruction meets the varied needs of our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Work that is not finished by the end of Thursday’s session rolls over into the next week. Similar to established news websites, stories are uploaded as they are ready for publication and moved off of the front page only after being replaced by newer contributions. ------------------------------------------------Language of Instruction----------------------------------------------------------- The language of instruction for our program will be English. That said, the participating teachers all possess some level of familiarity with Spanish (the L1 of a vast majority of our students), which should prove beneficial as we examine Latin-derived vocabulary. Additionally, we have two Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) speaking teachers at the school willing to serve as consultants in order to ensure that our approach to teaching vocabulary serves the needs of our Chinese speaking students. --------------------------------------------Our Teaching Team--------------------------------------------------------------------- Swapna Roa- ESL Certified, ELA Certified Caroll Jimenez – ESL Certified, Social Studies Certified ------------------------------------------------------Materials/Resources---------------------------------------------------------*The materials described below are used by both our ‘High’ and ‘Low’ proficiency groups. The text selections and materials will, however, be differentiated to meet the needs of each group. Tuesday Session Materials: Articles/Video content used for analysis during our Tuesday sessions are acquired by teachers via free websites or through existing subscriptions. Several educational websites exist that offer articles at various lexical levels. These resources allow us to further differentiate within the two main groups as needed. Graphic organizers, worksheets, complex manipulative sets, and other materials used to bolster understanding and analysis of the content focused articles and video clips are custom designed by our teachers. In addition to helping students achieve content understandings, these materials are designed to cultivate metalingusitic awareness as it relates to grammar, vocabulary, as well as pragmatics. Paper supplies and printers are available for our use. Thursday Session Materials: The technology resources utilized by this program during the production phase (e.g. computers, internet access, I-pads, video cameras, video editing software, sound equipment, etc.) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ESL research team serves to identify and address issues affecting ELLs at our school. To inform these undertakings, teachers relay information attained at out of school PDs as well as information gathered through published materials focused on language pedagogy. Our sessions allow teachers to think critically about the issues facing our ELLs as they research and discuss various topics related to language pedagogy and acquisition. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development In our study groups, participating educators discuss the latest books, articles, and other related materials focused on effective teaching strategies that can be implemented when teaching ELL students. Attendees are encouraged to complete readings before attending the session to maximize discussion and brainstorming time. The nature of our sessions allows for generation of ideas specifically tailored to the needs of our student population, something that is not always possible at out-of-school professional development meetings. Actionable steps and techniques are identified and distributed to all teachers at our school after each meeting. The ELL educator study group meet once a month on Wednesday from 3pm-5pm December-April (Exact dates listed below). While teachers participating in our program lead the sessions, the meetings will be offered to all teachers at the school. All teachers and service providers are encouraged to attend these sessions, as all at our school serve ELL students in the classroom. -----------Teachers to receive training (Others not yet listed are welcome to join in at any time)--------------- The five teachers listed below will be attending all PD sessions listed on the schedule: Swapna Rao- ESL/ELA Caroll Jimenez – ESL, Social Studies Kayla Ichikawa– ELA Joe Delaney – Social Studies Cristin Keely - ELA, Non-Fiction Reading and Writing -------------------------------------ELL Educator Study Group Schedule and Topics-------------------------------------- (DATES TO BE DETERMINED) - English Learners, Academic Literacy, and Thinking: Defining the Issues. This preliminary session will focus on cultivating understanding of the basic issues ELLs face in varied contexts within the school system. PD leader: Swapna Rao and Carroll Jimenez Attending: (Attendees to be determined) (DATE) - Literacy in the Curriculum: Challenges for ELLs This session will focus on some of the complex challenges that face ELLs form various language backgrounds as they read English language texts. The session will lead by one of our ESL teachers, as well as one of our SPED teachers with expert knowledge of struggling learners. PD leaders: MSwapna Rao and Carroll Jimenez Attending: (Attendees to be determined) (Date)- Building Bridges to Support Text: Support Academic Reading and Examples This session will focus on methods for building vocabulary and background schema to support ELL understanding of academic texts. PD leader: Swapna Rao and Carroll Jimenez Attending: (Attendees to be determined) (Dates)- Scaffolding ELLs to be Successful Writers This session will focus on methods for assisting ELLs in the writing process (sentence frames, vocabulary modelling, use of graphic organizers in writing, etc.) PD leaders: Caroll Jimenez- ESL , Social Studies Attending: Attendees to be determined (Date)- Planning for a High-Challenge, High-Support Classroom: Setting up ELLs for Success 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development This session will focus on setting classroom routines and expectations that ensure ELLs are held accountable to the same expectations as their peers. PD leader: Swapna Rao and Carroll Jimenez Attending: Attendees to be determined Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: -----------------------------------------------------------------Rationale------------------------------------------------------------- It is essential that the parents of our ELL students understand the journalistic process that their children are involved. We aim cultivate this understanding while simultaneously focusing on topics that are relevant to them as parents of English language learners and/or immigrant children. At each of these meetings, we will focus on a piece of text or other news media that is relevant to these families' lives. Discussion about the topic will follow. Finally, all in attendance will brainstorm ideas for articles related to the topic that students can report on in the weeks that follow. The parent engagement meetings aim to engage parents in topics relevant to their students as ELLs and as young journalists through transforming these subjects into topics of inquiry. --------------------------------------------------------Schedule and Duration---------------------------------------------------- Parents will be invited to meet with our group on three Wednesday afternoon sessions (3:00-5:00pm), and two evening sessions (6:00-8:00). There will be one meeting per month beginning in December and lasting until April. -------------------------Specific Topics and Dates of Parent Engagement Sessions----------------------------------- (Dates to be determined) - (3:00-5:00pm) - The Link Between First language and Second language Literacy This session aims inform ELL parents of the link between L1 and L2 language literacy and to inspire families to read and discuss together in either English or their first language. Session leader: Caroll Jimenez (Example ideas for reporting: Interviews with parents that read as a group) (Date to be determined) (6:00-8:00) - ELL Status and the Road to High School This session raises awareness about the type of work students will encounter in high school, and what readings and activities can be undertaken to help ELL students prepare for more complex material. Session leader: Swapna Rao (Example idea for reporting: Interview with Sunset Park Prep ELL alumni focused on High School experience ) 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities (Date TBD) (3:00-5:00pm) - Understanding the NYSESLAT This session focuses on the history of standardized testing in the state of New York, and specifically the development of the NYSESLAT as a mechanism for determining language level. The session will also familiarize parents with the format of the test. Session leaders : Swapna Rao and Carroll Jimenez (Example idea for reporting: Interview with former ELLs who passed the NYSESLAT) (Date to be determined) (6:00-8:00) English Fun for the Whole Family This session will focus on ways that families can practice English at home while engaging in leisure activities such as playing board games, watching and discussing movies and television shows, reading stories together, etc. Session leaders : Ms. Rao, Ms. Jimenez (Example idea for reporting: Article detailing activities that families have reported to be fun and productive in developing English language skills) Date to be determined (3:00-5:00) Developing English Language Skills During Summer Vacation This session focuses on activities that ELL students, as well as their families, can engage in during the summer months to ensure that their language skills continue to develop. Session leaders : Ms. Rao, Ms. Jimenez (Example idea for reporting: Article that provides information about programs, camps, and other free options for ELLs during the summer.) --------------------------------------------------Translation and Interpretation------------------------------------------------ A number of measures will be employed to ensure the media and discussion during these sessions is accessible to all parents attending our sessions: 1.) Text will be translated into Spanish, Chinese, Arabic (teachers at our school have volunteered to help make these translations) 2.) Video clips will be selected only if they can be viewed with subtitles in the languages listed above. 3.) Students will act as interpreters/translators for their parents during group discussions. 4.) Volunteer teachers will be in attendance to help act as interpreters/translators for students who are unable to provide this service for their parents. *Translation services related to parents notifications is described in the section below ---------------------------------------------------------Parent Notification---------------------------------------------------- To maximize likelihood that notifications are received, parents will be informed of our meetings through translated letters sent home with students as well as letters sent home in the mail. These notifications will list the times, dates, and topics for upcoming meetings. These letters will include the family’s home language on one side, and English on the reverse side. Translations will be done by Mr. Tepfer and Ms. Jimenez with the help of two other teachers who have volunteered to double check our Chinese and Arabic translations. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Sunset Park Prep Borough Brooklyn School Number 821 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jennifer Spalding Coach Keith Herrador ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Avi Tepfer Teacher/Subject Area Caroll Jimenez/S.S., ENL Teacher/Subject Area Swapna Rao/ELA, ENL Related-Service Provider Shari Tabb ,Guidance Counselor Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Lauren Scott Coach School Counselor Shari Tabb Parent Lisandra Rivera Parent Coordinator Evelyn Deliz Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 507 Total number of ELLs 85 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.77% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 K 1 3 2 4 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At Sunset Park Prep we use the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to assess the literacy skills of all of our students, including our ELLs. We use this assessment three times a year to monitor reading accuracy, fluency, as well as comprehension. At the start of each school year, our students are assessed and given a baseline benchmark level (i.e. level P). All teachers record data on an excel spreadsheet, which is pre-programmed with an algorithm to measure reading growth (i.e. if a student grows from level S to level U, the excel spreadsheet would calculate/show .58 years in reading growth). Based on students’ baseline assessments, ENL teachers collaborate with English and Language Arts and Special Education Teacher Support Service teachers to group students to plan for small group and instruction and interventions. We also use our reading-assessment data to inform our unit planning. Teachers use reading-level data to inform the 2018-19 CEP 60  comprehension skills/objectives students will need to learn each unit to reach the next level band. Additionally, teachers use reading-level data to choose level-appropriate book-club books and short-story texts for students’ independent practice. Our literacy assessment data therefore informs instructional decisions, as it guides the grouping of students for reading instruction, the selection of texts, and the needs for intervention. It also allows us to track student progress across a school year and across grade levels. Moreover, it allows us to assess the outcomes of our instructional decisions and practices. In analyzing NY State test results and our reading level information, and in consultation with our Teachers College staff developer, we have theorized that students need more small group instruction and guided practice to grow their reading levels. From this data, and the desire to move our students’ reading levels, we created the weekly 90-minute ELA Reading Intervention block. During this time, our Entering and Emerging ELLs work directly with an ENL teacher who provides targeted small group instruction. For our Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs, this is an opportunity for Reading Specialists to provide literacy intervention and support as needed. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As part of our ELA program, two periods per week are dedicated to reading/language interventions. During this time all ELLs and Former ELLs receive targetted reading and language interventions with our reading specialists and ENL teachers. Additionally, our Academic Intervention Committee is currently in the process of designing a structure for additional daily periods of targetted smalll group and individual academic intervention for all students in need, including ELLs and Former ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At Sunset Park Prep we evaluate the success of our programs for all students, including ELLs. One way in which we evaluate the success of our literacy/ELA/ENL/reading intervention program and curriculum, for example, is by completing at least three reading-level assessments for all students each year to measure student reading-level growth. Another way is by using the grades 3-8 Writing Continuums and Student Facing Checklists produced by Teachers College to evaluate student writing progress for the three main genres of writing: information, opinion, narrative, as well as set individualized writing goals with students that align to the rubric/checklist. As a school, we also participate in collective grading of New York City Performance Assessments. During and after each grading session, teachers use an inquiry-based protocol to make observations on student work, specifically student argumentative-essay writing, identify areas of student writing strength and identify areas for student growth/progress. Teachers use these observations in common-planning meetings to set goals and write skill-specific teaching objectives for each content-area unit that will drive student progress. Another way we evaluate the success of our programs is by using diagnostic and post-unit assessments in our school purchased test-preparation curriculum (Crosswalk Coach by triumph learning and Ready New York CCLS by Curriculum Associates). We use these assessments at the start and end of each unit in order to measure student progress based on the Common Core Learning Standards. Furthermore, we evaluate NYSESLAT scores in each of the four modalities and the meeting and exceeding of AMAO 1 and 2 to assess the success of our Freestanding ENL program in particular. We aim to ensure that that the annual increases in the percentage of students making progress in English, as per the NYSESLAT (AMAO 1), as well as an annual increase in the percentage of students attaining English language proficiency (AMAO 2, meet or exceed the yearly targets. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As part of our ELA program, two periods per week are dedicated to reading/language interventions. During this time all ELLs and Former ELLs receive targetted reading and language interventions with our reading specialists and ENL teachers. Additionally, our Academic Intervention Committee is currently in the process of designing a structure for additional 2018-19 CEP 61  daily periods of targetted smalll group and individual academic intervention for all students in need, including ELLs and Former ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As part of our ELA program, two periods per week are dedicated to reading/language interventions. During this time all ELLs and Former ELLs receive targetted reading and language interventions with our reading specialists and ENL teachers. Additionally, our Academic Intervention Committee is currently in the process of designing a structure for additional daily periods of targetted smalll group and individual academic intervention for all students in need, including ELLs and Former ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use NYS ELA assessment and NYSESLAT data to inform our ELL programs. For example, the data reveals that the majority of our ELLs (74%) are at the Expanding level. We currently only have one Entering student, a sixth grader, 4 Emerging students (3 of them are 6th graders), and 9 Transtioning in the 6th grade, and 5 more TR in the 7th and 8th, who are also Students WIth Disability's (SWDs). Our sixth graders make up 45% of our ELL population and is our most diverse group of ELLs, in terms of language proficiency. We therefore have one ENL teacher who dedicates his whole schedule to 6th graders, while another also devotes a large percentage of her time to this grade as well. Data on modality performance on the NYSESLAT also informs our planning as it reveals, for example, that 21% of our incoming 6th graders scored low in the writing modality. Examation of modality performace also allows us to evaluate our effectiveness, as last year we placed emphasis on improving wiriting skills and all 90% of last year's 6th graders, and 89% of last year's 7th graders scored high in the writing modality. While this demonstrates our effectiveness in this area, the data also reveals a need for us to focus on reading and listening, as our students do not perform as well in these modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At Sunset Park Prep there are six classes in each grade. Classes are heterogenously grouped and students travel as a class. In each grade there are three ICT classes, which contain Students with Disabilities along with their general education peers. While some consideration is be made to placing ELLs in certain classes to ease the scheduling of ENL services, ESL status and or proficiency is not necessarily a determinating factor for class placement, as we aim to make all classes heterogenous and inclusive and afford all students with the same instructional opportunities. In the 6th grade ELLs and former ELLs requiring ENL services are incorporated into all 6 of our 6th grade classes. There are three 2018-19 CEP 62  6th grade ICT classes in which our ELLs who have IEPs are placed. Additionally, one 6th grade class contains students who receive 12:1 services in their core classes, some of whom are ELLs. Sixth grade ELLs whose proficiency level is Entering are placed in two of the 6 classes, which also contain ELLs at all other proficiency levels. Emerging students are placed in one of the 6 classes, which also contains ELL at all other proficiency levels. In the 7th grade, ELLs of all levels are placed in four of the six 7th grade classes. There are two 7th grade ICT classes in which our ELLs who have IEPs are placed, as well as one in which the ELLs who are also SWDs and require 12:1 services are placed. Likewise, in the 8th grade, ELLs of all levels are placed in three of the six 8th grade classes. There are two 8th grade ICT classes in which our ELLs who have IEPs are placed. b. TBE program. If applicable. We are currently in the first year of our TBE program. Our students, who are currently all at the EX level, travel with a larger homeroom class throughout the day, but have a separate Integrated ELA/ENL class, co-taught by an ELA certified and an ENL certified teacher. This class meets 180 minutes per week, exceeding the requirement as per CR part 154.2. They also come out of their larger homeroom class for a Bilingual Social Studies class, which meets 180 minutes per week, as well as a Home Language Arts (Spanish) class, which also meets 180 minutes per week. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our sixth grade ELLs at the EN and EM levels receive 360 minutes of ESL per week, as per CR Part 154.2. Our Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes, and our Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of ESL services and support. Stand-alone ESL is delivered through a Language Lab class with one of our 6th grade ENL teachers, while Integrated ENL is delivered by one of our 6th grade ENL teachers co-teaching in the ELA classroom. Our seventh grade ELLs at the EM levels receive 360 minutes of ESL per week, as per CR Part 154.2. Our Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes, and our Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of ESL services and support. Stand-alone ESL is delivered through a Language Lab class with one of our 7th grade ENL teachers. Our transitioning ELLs and some of our EX and CM ELLs receive Integrated ENL through a Current Events/ Non-Fiction class either taught by our SS/ENL dual certified teacher or co-taught by this teacher and an ELA certified teacher. The remaining EX and CM ELLs receive Intergrated ENL services though their ENL/ELA class taught by our dual certified ENL/ELA teacher. Our 8th grade ELLs at the EM levels receive 360 minutes of ESL per week, as per CR Part 154.2. Our Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes, and our Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of ESL services and support. Stand-alone ESL is delivered through a Language Lab class with one of our ENL teachers. Our TR, EX, and CM ELLs in the 8th grade receive Integrated ENL through our 8th grade ENL teacher co-teaching some periods of their ELA class and other periods of their Social Studies class. We are currently in the first year of our TBE program. Our students, who are currently all at the EX level, travel with a larger homeroom class throughout the day, but have a separate Integrated ELA/ENL class, co-taught by an ELA certified and an ENL certified teacher. This class meets 180 minutes per week, exceeding the requirement as per CR part 154.2. They also come out of their larger homeroom class for a Bilingual Social Studies class, which meets 180 minutes per week, as well as a Home Language Arts (Spanish) class, which also meets 180 minutes per week. 2018-19 CEP 63  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our ESL program, all core content is provided in English and in heterogeneous classes where English-proficient peers can serve as language models. In core courses through which Integrated ENL is provided, either the ENL teacher and the general education teacher collaborate to provide for the acquisition of English language skills through content area instruction and provide vocabulary support, or the dually certified teacher provides instruction of core content and English language development using ENL strategies. Additionally, the ENL team (A. Tepfer, C. Klapuri, S. Rao) participates in common planning with content area teachers to plan for the fostering of continued language development and making content comprehensible for all students. A focus is placed on scaffolding to provide an entry point for understanding of content, the explicit teaching of academic vocabulary and the complex subject specific ways of reading, writing, and utilizing language. The same holds true for the TBE program, in which students are in monolingual classes with their peers for all but their Social Studies and Home Language Arts. In Social Studies, as all of our current ELLs are at the Expanding level, the much of the content is delivered in English, though some readings, instructions, and all vocabulary words are taught in both Spanish and English. This is done to continue to provide Home Language support, but more importantly, to continue to develop skills in both languages. As the Common Core State Standards require students to read and understand texts of increasing complexity and to be engaged in increasingly more rigorous academic inquiry, all core content teachers at Sunset Park Prep are teachers of language to all of our students. Sunset Park Prep’s annual goals are aligned with the language needs of all of our students, including our ELLs and former ELLs. Among our goals are, developing of questioning and discussion techniques in our students, and to provide direct, cohesive, and cross-curricular writing and reading instruction in all content areas by ensuring teachers opportunities for collaboration, creating language development intervention opportunities, and promoting student writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Newly arrived ELLs who are Spanish speaking, are administered the Spanish LAB during the first 10 days of arrival. As most of the ELLs at Sunset Park Prep are at the Expanding proficiency level, they are provided with native language support, but they are not assessed in their home language. For newly arrived ELLs at the Entering proficiency, the ENL teachers translate assessments to ensure that the students are able to complete projects and unit exams. Additionally all ELLs are given the option to take the NY State Math assessment in their native language as available and ELLs are provided with glossaries during all testing as allowed by the city and State mandates. These glossaries are also used throughout the year, so that students are familiar with them at the time of State exams. In addition, we are using the CCLS-Aligned Home Language Arts Baseline and Benchmark Assessment for the students in our TBE program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As stated previously, all teachers at Sunset Park Prep are teachers of language to all of our students. As such, we aim to differentiate in order to provide entry points for all students to grasp content. In addition, the ENL teachers collaborate with content area teachers to provide for the acquisition of English language skills through content area instruction and provide vocabulary support. Also, the ENL team (A. Tepfer, C. Klapuri, S. Rao) participates in common planning with content area teachers to plan for the fostering of continued language development and making content comprehensible to all students. All content teachers post planned units to the school’s curriculum mapping site, which provides ENL teachers the opportunity to differentiate these units as necessary for ELLs. A focus is placed on scaffolding to provide an entry point for understanding of content and on the explicit teaching of cross-disciplinary academic language. Specific differentiation considerations for ELL subgroups include the following: SIFE: Currently, we do not have any students identified as SIFE. If any students identified as 2018-19 CEP 64  SIFE enroll in our school, our plan is as follows: SIFE students are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States, our priority will be providing intervention in both literacy and mathematics and exposure to content in order to build background content knowledge. Aside from the required ENL services required as per their proficiency level, SIFE students will also receive literacy intervention during our weekly 90 minute intervention block where they will receive targeted small group instruction. Additionally, Math intervention will be provided twice per week. Students will also invited to attend Study Hall daily for 45 minutes after school where they can use computers and complete work with teacher support. These students will also be afforded ELL testing accommodations. Newcomers: Upon entry into the school, newly entered newcomers are paired with a peer buddy to assist with understanding class instruction, completing classwork, etc. Also, assistive technology is given to newly entered newcomers to assist with understanding of the content (ie. iPads, audiobooks). Classroom libraries include books written in native language. For newly arrived ELLs at the Entering proficiency, the ENL teachers translate assessments to ensure that the students are able to complete projects and unit exams. For Newcomers who have had some time to develop language, we monitor their progress in content area classes closely, knowing that though they may appear to understand all of the content and assignments in their classes, their vocabulary may not have yet developed enough to allow success in core content classes. As needed, ENL and content area teachers collaborate to plan for the necessary scaffolding and language support these students will need. These students also receive literacy intervention during our weekly 90-minute intervention block where they receive targeted small group instruction. These students are also afforded ELL testing accommodations. Developing: The progress of Developing ELLs in their content area classes is monitored to ensure that they are receiving the support they need to be successful. As needed, ENL and content area teachers collaborate to plan for the necessary scaffolding and language support these students will need. A focus is placed on scaffolding to provide an entry point for understanding of content and the explicit teaching of academic vocabulary and the complex subject specific ways of reading, writing, and utilizing language. English and Language Arts teachers also organize literature circles, which group students heterogeneously to engage in shared reading. To further differentiate literature circles, teachers assign roles for each group member and each role is aligned to the reading skill each particular student needs to practice in order to achieve reading-level growth. To further support ELLs, teachers offer anchor charts and bookmarks/index cards which provide sentence starters/writing prompts to help students discuss or write about their books. These students also receive literacy intervention during our weekly 90-minute intervention block where they receive targeted small group instruction. They are also afforded ELL testing accommodations. Long-term ELLs: At Sunset Park Prep, we have found that most of our long-term ELLs are students who require interventions that are not limited to language acquisition, and most are Students With Disabilities in our ICT classes, who benefit from having two teachers in all core content classes. In addition to providing the types of in-class content-area differentiation that is afforded to Newcomer and Developing ELLs as described above, these students receive reading intervention during our weekly 90 minute intervention block where they receive targeted small group instruction. Additionally, Math intervention is provided twice per week. Students are also invited to attend Study Hall daily for 45 minutes after school where they can use computers and complete work with teacher support. These students are also afforded ELL testing accommodations. Former ELLs: As all teachers at Sunset Park Prep assess students and design and differentiate instruction to meet student needs, students who are in their first two years after exiting ELL status continue to benefit from the differentiation that all of our Newcomer and Developing ELLs receive, as described above. Their progress in reading, writing, listening and speaking continues to be monitored. If necessary, former ELLs receive reading intervention during our weekly 90-minute intervention block where they receive targeted small group instruction. English and Language Arts teachers also organize literature circles, which group students heterogeneously to engage in shared reading. To further differentiate literature circles, teachers assign roles for each group member and each role is aligned to the reading skill each particular student needs to practice in order to achieve reading-level growth. These students are also afforded ELL testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At Sunset Park Prep, our ELL-SWDs are supported by Special Education teachers in collaboration with general education teachers in our ICT classrooms in all core content areas. All content taught, texts used, and instructional practices are at grade-level, as these classes also contain general education ELL and English proficient students of the same grade. In the English Language Arts classes, for example, the following instructional strategies are used to provide access to the content and aid in 2018-19 CEP 65  accelerating English language development: read aloud, think aloud, shared reading, guided reading, literature circles, book partnerships/clubs, inquiry-based lessons (i.e. students traveling in groups to study model student notebooks and make observations regarding what makes a great reader’s and writer’s notebook), independent-writing projects, reading/writing conferences, peer revising/editing protocols, peer feedback protocols (i.e. the TAG strategy: Tell the writer something they did well, Ask the writer a question, Give the writer a suggestion). In terms of grade-level materials, we use grade-level shared-reading texts (i.e. “To Kill a Mockingbird” by Harper Lee for 8th grade). We also use Crosswalk Coach by triumphlearning and Ready New York CCLS by Curriculum Associates. To help support our students with content-area/domain-specific vocabulary, we teach all students the “55 words that make or break student understanding,” aligned with the CCLS, as identified in “Teaching the Critical Vocabulary of the Common Core” by Marilee Sprenger. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWDs receive all instruction in the least restrictive environment. For their content area classes they are supported by a Special Education teacher and a content area general education teacher in an ICT classroom. For all other classes, including electives they are taught by general education teachers. These teachers review students’ IEP’s to ensure that they are addressing student needs and working towards guiding the students to achieve their IEP goals. Special Education, ENL and general education teachers have common planning periods where they discuss student work, progress, and needs. The academic progress of all students with IEP’s is monitored by an assigned case manager from the Special Education department. As with all other ELLs, the ENL Team (A. Tepfer, C. Klapuri, S. Rao) monitors their progress as well. In this way, teachers collaborate to ensure that the needs of ELL-SWDs are being met and all required supports are being provided to ensure academic success and achievement of IEP goals, while remaining in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At Sunset Park Prep, we have a reading intervention program and a mathematics intervention program in which our ELLs participate along side their English proficient peers. At the start of each school year, all students are assessed using The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to assess the literacy skills. We use this assessment three times a year to monitor reading accuracy, fluency, as well as comprehension. This data guides the grouping of students for reading intervention. ENL teachers collaborate with English and Language Arts and Special Education Teacher Support Service teachers to plan for this targeted small group and instruction and interventions. Reading intervention is provided during a 90 minute weekly block. Based on the needs of the students, this intervention may be provided by a reading specialist or by one of the ENL teachers. These interventions are offered in English. Our Math intervention program meets twice a week throughout the school year. Students who are under grade level in the State Math exam are invited to participate. Additionally, all of our students are invited to our after-school studyhall, which meets daily, where students have use of laptops to complete assignments and have the support of various teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the past few years, we have implemented a Non-fiction Reading and Writing class taught our ENL teachers in order to focus on the reading and writing needs of our ELLs and Former ELLs. We will continue to evaluate the effectiveness of this course throughout the year and determine if to continue this course or develop a different type of course focusing on the needs of our ELLs in the coming years. We are also evaluating the effectiveness of the structure of the reading intervention block and have been planning for additional weekly, even daily, blocks of reading and math interventions for all of our students, including ELLs and Former ELLs. Towards the end of last year we also piloted a lunch studyhall intervention program to catch students who were in risk of failing core classes. They were assigned mentor teachers who guided them as they completed missed work and projects. We are in the process of improving upon this structure to implement it in the common months. 2018-19 CEP 66  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time there are no plans to discontinue any programs or services for ELLs. We are currently in the first year of our TBE Spanish program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At Sunset Park Prep, all students including ELLs are afforded access to all school programs, be they during the school day or after school. A variety of after-school enrichment opportunities are offered to all students. These include choir, rock band, crochet club, theater troupe, basketball, soccer, running, gardening, and game design. All students, including ELLs also have the opportunity to become student leaders through participation in Student Council and by training to be Peer Mediators. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support all of the needs of our varied student population, including ELLs and Former ELLs, the teachers at Sunset Park Prep use varied and grade-appropriate leveled texts, visually enhanced materials, word walls, graphic organizers, and technology to support language development. Classrooms are equipped with smartboards and teachers are encouraged to include visual details and illustrations to support language and enhance student engagement and understanding. Students use laptops in the classrooms and at home to complete assignments. We use Google Classroom to provide differentiated student leveled digital content, which can include illustrations, graphs and videos, to aid understanding and expand content experience, to demonstrate a concept and provide support through hyperlinks to dictionaries and glossaries. iPads are given to beginners to assist in translation and to advance language development using applications such as Duolingo and BrainPop ESL. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At Sunset Park Prep, we understand that the more literate students are in their home language, the stronger their transition to English proficiency. We therefore support our students’ home language as best we can in the ENL program. For newly arrived ELLs, we provide translated content, as well as content texts in the native language. Teachers and paraprofessionals use native language as an entry point when and where needed. Our classroom libraries contain texts in our students’ home languages. ELLs with common home language also provide support for each other as they collaborate on tasks and translate for their less proficient peers. In our TBE program, Home Language Arts - Spanish is delivered much in the same way as ELA is delivered in ELA classes. Students read grade appropriate literature and articles, to work with engaging texts that feature big ideas and rich content. Discussions are used to build both conversational and academin language and knowledge. Writing is used to build language, knowledge and thinking skills, and the teaching of vocabulary is used to build breadth amd depth of knowledge. Formative assessments, such as participation in class disucssions, written responses, quizzes, and projects will be sued to assess their home language skills. Additionally, we are using the NYC DOE-developed Home Language Arts - Spanish Performance Tasks, which are performance assessments that require students to construct a response to demonstrate knowledge or skills. They are designed to provide teachers with detailed information about their students’ strengths and needs in Spanish-language academic literacy and to serve as a resource to help plan individual and group instruction. The tasks are skill-based and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 67  At Sunset Park Prep, all students receive all instruction and services alongside their grade and age peers. All required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Classroom practice is cognitively challenging and aligned to grade-level Common Core State Standards and classroom libraries contain age-, grade-, appropriate books and materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To support all of the needs of our varied student population, including ELLs and Former ELLs, the teachers at Sunset Park Prep use varied and grade-appropriate leveled texts, visually enhanced materials, word walls, graphic organizers, and technology to support language development. Classrooms are equipped with smartboards and teachers are encouraged to include visual details and illustrations to support language and enhance student engagement and understanding. Students use laptops in the classrooms and at home to complete assignments. We use Google Classroom to provide differentiated student leveled digital content, which can include illustrations, graphs and videos, to aid understanding and expand content experience, to demonstrate a concept and provide support through hyperlinks to dictionaries and glossaries. iPads are given to beginners to assist in translation and to advance language development using applications such as Duolingo and BrainPop ESL. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students and their families are invited to attend an orientation before the school year begins. The Principal (J. Spalding), Assistant Principal (L. Scott), Parent Coordinator (E. Deliz), Guidance Counselor (S. Tabb), Deans (T. Santiago & D. Torres), Math Coach (K. Herrador), Access/Special Education Corrdinator (L. Drago), ENL Team (A. Tepfer, C. Klapuri, S. Rao) and various content area teachers are all present at this event. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students are offered Spanish as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At Sunset Park Prep all teachers are teachers of ELLs. The teaching of ELLs and former ELLs is therefore always a consideration in all of our professional development activities. Our professional development plan for our ENL teachers, and our entire staff, includes the following: • Professional Development time very Monday which includes focused PD cycles, committee work, and data teams studying specific sub-groups, including ELLs and SWDs.• A Common Planning period programmed as part of teachers’ 25 teaching periods.• Frequent Department Meetings and Grade Meetings.• Teacher-led Professional Development series during a monthly “UnConference.”• Collaborative 2018-19 CEP 68  time to plan across content and grade during “Planning for the Month.”• Focused literacy and language development work for ENL and ELA teachers with a Teachers College staff developer who is on site 25 days this year.• Workshops run by our technology coach on enhancing instruction through the use of technology, to promote greater student engagement and support the needs of all students.• A variety of subject area teachers and service providers, including ENL teachers, Special Education teachers, Speech Therapists, and Paraprofessionals, will attend workshops at Teachers College for a total of 25 calendar days. In addition to the above, while we have a staff developer who spends a total of 25 days with us each year working on literacy, we also have Lead Teachers in ELA, Social Studies and Science and a Math Coach. We have two Deans who support and offer development on discipline techniques. Every new teacher receives an in-house mentor, as well as tremendous guidance from department teams, grade teams, committees, data teams, and nearby classrooms. Additionally, much of our teacher support is funneled through Danielson. Staff members collaborate to plan differentiated units of instruction; analyze data and student work to ascertain instructional effectiveness and accessibility to ELLs, former ELLs and SWDs; examine student progress; develop goals; and determine the need for, and success of, academic interventions. Through these varied Professional Development offerings and opportunities for professional collaboration, we ensure that all staff members, including administrators, teachers, service providers and paraprofessionals, are cognizant of the needs of our students, including ELLs, former ELLs and SWDs; develop expertise in differentiation; are intentional about the use of scaffolds so that students experience rigor and struggle productively; and gain knowledge of language acquisition, ENL methodologies, and instructional strategies and best practices for working with ELLs and former ELLs. We have a comprehensive support system to help teachers and staff meet the CCSS and support ELLs as they engage in the CCSS. At the ground level, teachers spend time working with co-teachers and content teams to develop curriculum maps in Common Planning meetings. They collaborate to examine CCLS standards, share best practices, devise common strategies, study student work and progress, and actively collaborate. Teachers also use curriculum maps in grade teams to plan cross-curricular projects and experiences to meet a variety of learning standards set out in the CCSS. Teachers and staff receive PD on CCSS at the beginning of the year, and on Chancellor's Conference Days. All of our teachers, who are all teachers of ELLs, including our ENL teachers, regularly participate in a number of Professional Development Workshops and Series offered by the NYC DOE’s Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center and the Division of Language Learners & Student Support, as well as those offered by other educational organizations and institutions throughout NYC, such as the NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (R-BERN), and Bank Street College of Education. Currently, C. Klapuri and A. Tepfer are participating in Maria Friedland's (Senior ELL Instructional Specialist – Secondary Education NYCDOE Division of English Language Learners and Student Support) institute on, Academic Vocabulary in Middle School Social Studies: Cultivating Concept Knowledge in Service of Core Instruction, as well as The Socratic Approach to ELL Instruction workshop series. The former includes full day sessions in November 2017 and January 2018, along with webinar and online sessions throughout December and March, and onsite coaching by Maria Friedland. The latter takes place over two days in October 2017. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 are met in a variety of ways. Our ENL teachers have departmental and planning meetings. The teachers teaching ENL, ELA, and HLA, and Social Studies in the TBE program share planning periods and collaborate on unit and lesson planning. During these meetings, teachers focus on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, sharing best practices, co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. During this time they may also meet with our Teacher’s College literacy staff developer, our technology coach, or may collaborate to plan differentiated units of instruction; analyze data and student work to ascertain instructional effectiveness and accessibility to ELLs and former ELLs; examine student progress; develop goals; and determine the need for, and success of, academic interventions. ENL teachers also work on data teams studying specific sub-groups, including ELLs. ENL teachers also participate ELL-specific Professional Development Workshops and Series offered by the NYC DOE’s Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center and the Division of Language Learners & Student Support, as well as those offered by other educational organizations and institutions throughout NYC, such as the NYC Regional Bilingual Education 2018-19 CEP 69  Resource Network (R-BERN), and Bank Street College of Education. As all teachers at Sunset Park Prep are teachers of ELLs, we aim to meet the Professional Development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 with ease, as most of our Professional Development offerings include some element of emphasis on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Through collaborations with the ENL teachers in grade team meetings, department meetings, as well as through work with the Teacher’s College literacy coach, all staff members, including administrators, teachers, service providers and paraprofessionals, learn about language acquisition, the needs of ELLs and former ELLs; develop expertise in differentiation; the use of scaffolds so that students experience rigor and struggle productively; ENL methodologies, and instructional strategies and best practices for working with ELLs and former ELLs. Furthermore, during our monthly teacher-led Professional Development series, as well as during Professional Development days such as Election Day, the ENL Team (A. Tepfer, C. Klapuri, S. Rao) will lead a variety of workshops, planned topics include: Research-Based Strategies for Teaching ELLs, Maintaining Rigor while Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs, Principles of Quality Teaching for English Learners, Developing Academic Literacy in ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences and initial parent orientations, we conduct individual meetings with the parents/guardians of English language learners to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meetings are scheduled individually and occur within the first three months of the school year and take place during designated parent engagement time. However, some of these occur via telephone, as some parents are unable to attend. During this designated parent engagement time, all teachers are present in the school and therefore available to meet with parents as necessary. For Spanish-speaking parents, meetings are conducted in Spanish. Staff members translate for meetings with Chinese-speaking parents. We use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit as necessary. Additionally, ENL teachers contact parents to report on their child’s progress periodically throughout the school year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. At Sunset Park Prep, we are always looking for ways to increase opportunities for parents to be engaged in our school community. Among our first activities of each school year is Back to School Night, an opportunity for parents to learn about curriculum in each subject area and provide support to students at home. To keep parents abreast of their child’s progress, we use an online grade system called PupilPath, which parents and students can check on a weekly basis. This allows parents and student to measure progress, communicate with teachers, and see if they are properly preparing for high school and beyond. This night is also an opportunity for us to welcome the families to be part of our community, so we culminate with a barbeque in the school yard. We continue to expand our work with parent engagement, for all parents, including parents of ELLs. We make regular calls using School Messenger (in English, Mandarin, and Spanish), send home a monthly calendar (in English and Spanish), and call with attendance, lateness, and discipline issues. All calls are made in English and in the parent’s home language, with the assistance of our staff members who speak other languages, as necessary. Our Parent Coordinator, in partnership with the PTA, SLT, and the 2018-19 CEP 70  administrstion offered workshops regularly on a variety of topics, including those of particular interest to our parents of ELLs. The topics range from technology and protecting children online to immigration, domestic abuse, and health, with various experts throughout the community presenting, and translation provided. We also provide workshops on the use of PupilPath, so that parents can access their child’s grades and gage their progress, High School Information workshops, provided by out Guidance Counselor (S. Tabb) to assist parents is guiding their child’s High School choices, and ELA and Math workshops, provided by our instructional coaches (L. Scott and K. Herrador). Additionally, we provide regular parent events such as International Night (a culminating event of Global Awareness Week), Arts Showcase, and Community Day. Additionally, our Parent Engagement Committee – comprised of our parent coordinator and teachers, including ENL plans events such as Family Soccer Night, which pitted students against parents in our gymnasium and a Block Party. Among our school goals is to continue to build a school culture where parents are not only involved, but engaged in the school community and knowledgably support student academic achievement, by doubling our offerings of celebratory, academic student events, community building events, and parent workshops. response here: 2018-19 CEP 71 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jennifer Spalding, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Sunset Park Prep School DBN: 15K821 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jennifer Spalding Lauren Scott Evelyn Deliz Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Caroll Jimenez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lisandra Rivera Parent Swapna Rao Avi Tepfer Lauren Scott Keith Herrador Shari Tabb Anita Skop Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K821 School Name: Sunset Park Prep Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of every year we offer a survey in the languages spoken by our students based on their home language designation in ATS. We ask parents which language and method of communication they most prefer (letter home, phone call, email, or text message). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language English Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 74  Spanish Mandarin Cantonese Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At the beginning of the school year, we provide all students with the following items, translated into parent's preferred languages: - An agenda book which includes our policies and information in the front few pages - A welcome letter from the principal - A welcome letter and final supply list from the teachers - A "Clubs and Activities" pamphlet - Medical forms, blue cards, lunch forms, general permission slips, registration survey - A PupilPath registration letter - A Welcome Letter from the PTA 2018-19 CEP 75  Throughout the year, we provide all students with the following items, translated into parent's preferred languages: - A monthly calendar - PupilPath grades - Letters on updated policies, half days, etc - Access to our website - Flyers about family events At the end of the year, we provide all students with the following items, translated into parent's preferred languages: - State Test Briefing - End of the Year Letter - June Calendar of Events 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? - Back to School Night, September - IEP Meetings, all year - Attendance Meetings, all year - Parent Teacher Conferences, November - Family Science Night, December - STEM and Literacy Night, February - Parent Teacher Conferences, March 2018-19 CEP 76  - International Night, April - Parent Night, May - Community Night, May - New Student Orientation, June - Graduation, June 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We use all of the above, as well as provide a welcome letter with key information, translated into many languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We frequently survey parents, both formally and informally, to asess our accesibility. We use a mid-year survey, PTA meetings, and school messenger to solicit parent feedback. 2018-19 CEP 77 
