2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K898 School Name: M.S. 898 Principal: MARCELLA CARR 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Middle School 898 331600010898 6 130 Rochester Avenue 9293973326 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 16k898 n/a Fax: Marcella Carr Gay MCarr3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Marcella Carr Gay Barbara Charles CharleneCorbett AnikaCaesar CharleneCorbett XavierCorbett NaashirRoyster KassandraSandiford / Sheltering Arms CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 16 RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Street, Brooklyn NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ramon@schools,nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-9880 Phone Number: n/a Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: bfitxge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189353954 Phone Number: 7189353954 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarcellaCarr BarbaraCharles AnikaCaesar CharleneCorbett XavierCorbett NaashirRoyster KassandraSandiford Tara Cox ShiraEngel Terrance Roumph *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sasha Roopchand Tamara Garner Raven Garner Tatiana Terry Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? It is our mission to ensure that each Brooklyn Green School graduate possesses the tools necessary to be successful in high school and beyond. A crucial part of this mission involves bringing students, families and school staff together to collaborate around creating an environment that supports student voice, promotes equity and embeds culturally relevant learning opportunities, student inquiry and critical thinking in the curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are a progressive school that focuses on the "whole child." Our daily practices include Restorative Circles and mindfulness, as a means to supporting students with improving attention, regulating emotions and feeling empathy for others. Students also participate in Yoga once weekly. Brooklyn Green students learn Korean language and culture in Korean class and Taekwondo. Our academic curriculum is designed to allow for productive struggle, promote resilience and perseverance. Students engage in inquiry based, hands-on problem solving activities that culminate in projects and, or real-world application. We have partnered with various organizations that support our mission and vision; Sheltering Arms, our CBO collaborates with us to provide Expanded Learning Time (ELT) for our students. The goal of "ELT" is to provide students with enrichment and academics that extend the work they are doing in the classroom. During "ELT" students get to explore their passions in arts and athletics, along with receiving academic intervention and enrichment, based on their individual needs. We have also partnered with Classroom Inc, which provides students with opportunities to develop literacy, problem-solving, critical thinking and leadership skills. Other partners include Middle School Quality Initiative, The Korean Language Foundation, Stuyvesant Strikers Soccer, NYC Sanitation Department, Beyond Bias US and Green Schools Alliance. Curricular highlights include our culturally relevant health course, inquiry-based science and mathematics classes, Korean Language and a multi-faceted Humanities curriculum which includes writing, social studies, literacy and project-based learning. We are a Middle School Quality Initiative School which means that we have built-in response to literacy based interventions, tiered literacy assessments and strategic reading and teacher teams that focus on ensuring that students graduate 8th grade at or above grade level in reading. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 40% of our students have Individualized Education Plans. 10% of those students ICT students require Crisis Paraprofessionals. One student has only attended district 75 schools and requires supports in our larger classroom setting. Most of our students with IEPs require additional support and time in literacy and math, intervention in literacy and math and some social emotional supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a new school, we do not have data from the past year. However, based on our math and reading assessments, district data and students' state exam scores, our key area of focus is literacy development in alignment with The Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction. One of our goals is to support students in language acquisition, developing higher level comprehension and writing skills. Additionally, we are focused on creating a culture of perseverance, in alignment with The Framework for great Schools, Supportive Environment. Based on our mathematics classroom observations, many of out students lack problem-solving skills and confidence in the math classrooms which can be supported by engaging them in rich tasks that promote resilience and perseverance. Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment 2018-19 CEP 10  Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a new school for the 2018-19 school year, our team began the needs assessment process by looking at district wide data trends. Then we looked at the 2016-17 data trends of P.S. 335 which is the school from which most of our students came and lastly the SY 2017-18 Math and ELA State exam data. We used the Degrees of Reading Power, Engage New York released Math and ELA exam questions and teacher-generated assessment data. Additionally, we looked at teacher curriculum maps and unit plans. We identified the following strengths: -Quality curriculum that embeds opportunities for students to engage in inquiry, grapple with concepts, make sense of the learning and connect to it in meaningful ways. - Some students are able to write short response essays, independently read grade appropriate texts, make inferences and compare in contrast. We identified the following priority needs: -There is some ambiguity between what teachers expected students to do and having a clear strategy for how they would get there. -UDL, modifications and differentiation is essential for every classroom. -70% of student reading skills are well below, below and approaching grade level. As a result, RTI is foremost. -In mathematics, students lack some foundational math skills which results in a lack of confidence and, in turn prevents them from persevering through challenging tasks. Therefore confidence must be built and perseverance cultivated. Additionally basic skill and drill needs to take place in the math classroom or during after school/ tutoring time and WIN (What I Need). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 at least 80% of The Brooklyn Green School students will show a 3% increase towards or beyond proficiency on the State ELA and Mathematics scores as compared to their individual 2018 state exam scores in grade 5. 2018-19 CEP 11  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Middle School Quality Initiative Professional Development supports us in planning literacy lessons that incorporates UDL. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, MSQI Coach SWDs, Higher Achieving students, students who are grouped in the bottom 1/3 based on state ELA and math scores Word Generation, Just Words and Wilson's trainings will support teacher with understanding what scaffolds and other structures need to be embedded in curricular. Inter-visitations, co-planning and data team action planning will support teachers with developing curriculum that meets the needs of all students. Students who scored below a 45 on the DRP Teachers, Administrators September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Inquiry Team work will focus on targeted intervention for sub-groups (bottom 1/3 in math and ela, students with disabilities) Students in "sub-groups" October 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, MSQI Coach, Wilson's Coach Teaches, Administrators, Ready Gen Coach, MSQI Coach Teacher, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support families in understanding what students experience in each classroom we are implementing a series of Curriculum Nights. The first Curriculum Night is "A Day in the Life," a time when families experience their students' school day, through participation in interactive classroom activities, under the guidance of each course instructor. The second part of this series is a "Workshop Night" in which students and families participate in activities that high-light the "what" and "why" of the curriculum. During the workshop night, families and students work through lessons that support their understanding of the expectations and expected outcomes of each lesson. The third part of this series, brings families and children together to look at student data to understand the implications of that data and to support students with goal setting. Additionally, Parent Teacher conferences will be student-led, in 2018-19 CEP 12  which students take ownership in their learning and know their data and set their own goals. The Series will take place beginning in September. The second part of the series will take place in November. The third part of the series will take place in January after students take mid-year assessments. Teachers and administrators will lead the curriculum night series, with the support of the PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to ensure parent engagement, we are relying on the PTA to support with informing families and getting them to attend the series of curriculum nights. Curriculum development is on-going and revised based on classroom outcomes. Lesson and unit plans structures require that teachers and students have reflection time, which allows for teacher teams to understand student learning needs and adjust curriculum accordingly. Our creative programming allows for teachers to look at data weekly and action plan around adjusting curricular. Additionally, scheduled time for co-planning is built into the day. As an MSQI school we have access to a data tool that supports us in understanding student growth levels and to support our work around strategic grouping. The DRP is given 3 times a year and will allow us to adjust curricular based on student reading data. The interim assessments will also provide us with clear understandings of what students can do and what students need support with. Budget monies have been allocated to purchase Just Words and Wilson's materials. Purchase of the materials ensures an in-house visit from a Wilson's/ Just Words Coach who will support teachers in implementing these interventions with fidelity. Our Special Education Teacher is also trained in the implementation Wilson's and Just Words. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data from January interim assessments, DRPs, as well as interim assessments, inclusive of Engage New York released state ELA and Math exam questions will demonstrate our progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series, DRP and Teacher generated assessments, using the Engage NY released questions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Brooklyn Green School's biggest strength is that teachers believe that all students can learn. This is evidenced by rich tasks and rigorous instruction that is planned in all classes. While we are a new school, without any data trends to reference, the level of engagement in the classrooms, specifically math and science classrooms, teacher feedback and observation data are all indicators of high expectations held by teachers. As a progressive school, our core beliefs are centered on supporting the whole child. Because we are small, we are unable to employ a Guidance Counselor and all other school based support team members are shared and only available to us 1 day a week. As a result, we found creative ways to address behavior challenges, meet students' social emotional needs and to ensure that all students feel safe, supported, challenged and engaged in their learning. We have implemented Restorative Practices; students actively participate in restorative circles 4 times a week, using the Morningside Curriculum. Additionally, students practice Yoga once a week. Students also practice Taekwondo once a week. To ensure that students learning needs are fully addressed, WIN classes (What I Need) are embedded in daily schedules. During WIN, students are grouped, according to their learning needs and receive enrichment or intervention. The WIN placements change weekly, as students gain skills and are assessed. Student conflicts are managed by using a leveled intervention practice. Restorative Justice is the core practice that supports conflict resolution and student reflection on their own negative choices and actions. Students perform community service, as opposed to detention for infractions. In order to ensure that student voices are honored inside and outside of the classroom, teachers plan lessons that provide students with multiple access points and various opportunities to demonstrate knowledge and understanding. Brooklyn Green School Students hold seats on the School Leadership Team, are District Scholar Ambassadors and are also Brooklyn Green Ambassadors. Students are currently campaigning for student government offices. Ambassadors and Student Government Officers will meet with Administration bi-weekly to discuss student feedback , wishes and concerns. Every teacher at the Brooklyn Green is an Adviser to a group of students. Advisers are the first point of contact when there are questions and concerns about a student. Advisers make parent contact whenever there is a concern for the student. Advisers will remain with that student throughout their middle school time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of Middle School 898 students will be engaged in Social Emotional and Well Being Programs through Restorative Circles, Yoga, Taekwando and Advisory. As a result, there will be no more than 5 infractions higher than level 3, as measured by the OORs incident system. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Every teacher will is trained to implement Restorative Circles, using the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility Curriculum. All students will participate in Restrative Circles 4 times a week and in Advisoroy 1 morning each week. Restorative Circles will consist of learning kindness, leadership, social emotional awareness, community building, etc. During Advisory, students will be given the opportunity to address academic concerns, personal issues, action plan and set goals, in small gropus and one on one with their Advisor. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Students August 2018-September 2018 Administration Teachers All support staff (Paras, ELT staff) will sit in on Restorative Circles as a means to understanding the process and protocols and to observe teacher implementation of Restorative Circles in order to address the needs of students throughout the day. Teachers Para-professionals September 2018- June 2018 Administration Teacher Most student infractions (when appropriate) will be addressed by utilizing Restorative Circles. During Restorative Circles student infractions will be addressed using this model to support students in being reflective and making smart decisions. All team members will participate in the IEP reviews to ensure that students' social emotional needs are being met, according to their IEP recommendations. Students Teachers September 2018-June 2018 Para Professionals Administration Teachers October 2018 Special Education Coordinatory Administrators Administration Teachers Administrators Para Professionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families have experienced Restorative Circles during the "Middle School Curriculum Night" We are implementing weekly yoga for families and sharing with them the benefits of yoga and mindfulness. Additionally, Circles will be used to begin and, or end PTA meetings. Parent newsletters hi-light articles that speak about the benefits of Restorative 2018-19 CEP 15  Circles, Yoga and Mindfulness. Parent workshops and the Parent Speaker Series will also hi-light Social Emotional Wellness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our Yoga and mindfulness certified Humanities teacher will implement yoga and mindfulness. Because we are a Korean Language District, we are able to offer our students Taekwondo as a means to self awareness and mental discipline. During out Tuesday co-planning time, the Special Education Coordinator will use that time to support teachers with reviewing and understanding the Social Emotional components each student's IEPS. Teachers will utilize the Morningside curriculum, attained during the summer trainings to ensure that daily circles are implemented with fidelity. CIrcle time has been scheduled in for the beginning of every day, Tuesday through Friday. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review ILogs and OORS reports bi-monthly to gather data around student behavior and behavioral infractions and identify students with repeat offenses and to action plan around supporting those children. We will review Jupiter online grading system reports each marking period when students are given progress reports to identify trends and action plan around how best to support social emotional needs of students. As a result, there will be no more than 5 infractions higher than level 3, as measured by the OORs incident system. As a result, by january 2019 there will be no more than 3 infractions higher than level 3, as measured by the OORs incident system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use OORS reports, Jupiter (our on-line grading system) anecdotals and ILog reports to assess progress, Student grades may also provide a view of the behavioral trends from class to class. In February of 2019 we will officially review all of the data sources to assess our plan and processes and determine next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Because we have 2 new teachers, one teacher who is not new but un-tenured and two senior teachers, our team naturally collaborates. The two senior teachers are mentors to the two new teacher. Without prompting, teachers already push into classes, co-teach lessons, meet and support teach other. Additionally, we have created time for teachers to engage in inquiry; look at data in real time, action plan, lesson study and collaborate. On Tuesdays, students participate mostly in electives and the arts which allows about 3 hours of "Tuesday Team Time" for all of the core teachers. This chunk of time gives teachers the opportunity to engage in robust collaborative work. While we already have a strong culture of collaboration and a structure in place that encourages that, we are still a new team and are looking to work on areas that we believe will be the most high leverage. Additionally, Assessment in instruction is a priority focus for our district. We believe that while we do not have th data to support our hypothesis we know that formative and summative assessments are the keys to understanding students' needs and addressing those needs, which will in-turn, make the greatest impact on student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 90% of Middle School 898 teachers will improve 1 level on the HEDI Scale in component 3d, "Using Assessment in Instruction." 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in Tuesday Team Meetings in which students participate in electives (Art, Taekwondo) and non-core classes (Health, physical education) and core teachers are freed up to participate in Inquiry work, professional development and co-planning for approximately 3 hours every Tuesday, to work collaboratively, to look at student work, conduct lesson studies and action plan around using assessment in Instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers Lead Teachers (Mentors) Outside partners Teachers will utilize Participate On line PD to access resources and learn best practices around lesson and unit planning , BFSC supports, the TDEC with a focus on using assessment in instruction. Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teacher Teams Teacher teams will utilize the DRP data and secondary assessments to action plan around daily lessons, student deficiencies and which formative assessments to use throughout the lessons, in order to ensure effective use of assessment. Teacher Teams Teacher teams will utilize DRP and classroom assessment data to determine which WIN (what I need) groups to place students in, the whats and whens of assessment (Checks for understanding, formal assessments, etc.) Teacher Teams October 2018- June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Participate Coach Administration Teacher Teams MSQI Coach Administration Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. BGS staff has teamed up with the PTA to implement a series of workshops, beginning in October, designed to support parents with understanding ways they can support children in various aspects of their school experiences (Social Emotional Leaning, Math, Literacy, Physical Education, etc.). Teachers will lead sessions that expose families to the content and skills, engage in a Q&A with families and provide families with take home support tools. The Principal's bi-weekly newsletter includes a "Ways to support your child" column that each teacher contributes to, that gives 2018-19 CEP 18  parents some "quick tricks" geared to reinforcing what students learn in school. Our website will be updated weekly with course information, homework, support tools, school based district and city wide parent workshops and events that provide families with resources to support their children's academic achievement. Beginning in November the Principal will host monthly coffees, in which instruction and academics will be on the agenda, as well as parent feedback and concerns. Additionally, parents who attend will have the opportunity to observe classes for a few minutes during the monthly coffees then engage in talks about what they see. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to support this work each teacher commits to a month in which they will present to families around a high-leverage skill for the workshop. As we do not have a Parent Coordinator, our PTA and Principal's Secretary will oversee the workshops and parent coffees, ensuring that all notifications go out via our social media, the REMIND text messaging tool we use, backpacking letters, phone calls and school calendar alerts. The principal will create her bi-weekly newsletter which will also include all important workshop and other event dates. Teachers will use some of the Tuesday Teacher Time to co-plan workshops and write the newsletter piece. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The DRP is administered in October, February and June. Teacher Advance data reports are pulled monthly in order to identify gaps and plan weekly Teacher Team Meetings and professional development in relation to each domain. By February all teacher observation reports will show evidence of teachers implementing feedback based on component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction. We will also conduct bi-weekly student work reviews and learning walks, during our Teacher Time Tuesdays to look at feedback given to students, what student self-assessment tools are being implemented in classes, rubrics and models. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be utilizing the Danielson Rubric, an in-house bulletin board rubric, RIDE protocols for looking at student work and using the Grant Wiggins 7 Keys to Effective Feedback checklist. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a new school we have the luxury of creative and strategic programming. As a result, we have time built in for mentoring new teachers, professional development outside and in-house, teacher team work, inter-visitations and teacher/school leader bi-weekly one on ones. Teachers are developed through a coaching model, not an evaluative model. The school leader confers with 1-2 teachers daily and pushes into at least 2 classrooms everyday. This has allowed for the SL to provide teachers with real-time coaching and address small pedagogical issues, missed opportunities and management fixes to support teacher growth and student achievement.The SL partners with teachers to co-teach, co -plan, model lessons or assist with lesson implementation. The priority needs that will be dressed in this goal will be ensuring that students are engaged as defined by the Danielson Rubric 3c. We believe that this is a natural progression, as it is supported by our goal in relation to Danielson 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction. In order for teachers to provide engaging lessons, they must understand where students are, what they need and how to get them there. If a student's needs are not being met, then he or she will not be engaged. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 Middle School 898 will increase at least 1 level in Advance Ratings for 3c, on the Danielson rubric for at least 90% of the teaching staff. Lessons that are observed will be observed through the lens of implementing culturally relevant curriculum and pedagogical practices. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development is designed based on the Advance observation reports and other needs assessments conducted on a regular basis (inter-visitations, teacher surveys, learning walks, student work protocols, coaching cycles, teacher check-ins) Teachers We will use Participate On-Line Professional Development, Borough Field Support Center Teams (SpEd, Math, ELA) to support with teacher development, Legacy Pathways, BeyondBiasUS (Professional Development Coach that supports culturally relevant pedagogy in the Health classroom), Teachers School Leader September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers School Leader Teachers School Leader BFSC Team Participate Partners Legacy Pathways Beyond Bias Teachers School Leader Teachers School Leader SBST Teachers Teachers School Leader September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 The School Leader meets bi-weekly with every team member to answer questions, check-in, provide coaching support and address any concerns. In order to address the needs of students with disabilities, the School based Support Team meets with the School Leader and Special Education Coordinator monthly, Daily concerns are communicated to the school leader and Special Education Coordinator, via email. The SpEd Coord. turn-keys any information about specific students at the Tuesday Team Times. Urgent information is communicated to the team, via group messaging and emails. The Special Education Coordinator provides professional development to the teacher teams on Tuesdays, to ensure that we are meeting the needs of our students with disabilities. The Special Education Coordinator implements IEP reviews and trainings so that teachers can understand the needs of the children they serve. The SpEd Coordinator and the School Leader meet on a weekly basis to action plan around PD, coaching and classroom practice. 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Parent Engagement Time on Tuesdays, families are invited to participate in mini workshops at which teachers will share what is happening in the classrooms, goals set for their students and how families can support them with achieving their goals. Bi-weekly newsletters, our website and social media are also tools that we utilize to share information around this work with families. Morning coffees with the principal are other opportunities for parents to explore curricular, share concerns and receive supports with ensuring student success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will support with parent workshops. The Tuesday Team Time built into the schedule is a structure that supports much of our collaborative work. We will also utilize Parent engagement time and Monday 80 minutes for parent workshops and coaching meetings. Teachers will implement workshops and the School Leader will facilitate the parent coffees and coaching cycles. All new teachers have mentors and receive additional in-class real-time coaching from the School Leader. We are using Bambricks "Get Better Faster" as a professional guide to much of this work. Other professional texts we are using are Meeting Wise, by Boudett and the "Constructivist Leader" by Lambert, et al. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February all teacher observation reports will show evidence of student engagement, based on component 3c, Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers will receive a rating of Developing or higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The DRP is administered in October, February and June. Teacher Advance data reports are pulled monthly in order to identify gaps and plan weekly Teacher Team Meetings and professional development in relation to each domain. We will also conduct bi-weekly student work reviews and learning walks, during our Teacher Time Tuesdays to look at feedback given to students, what student self-assessment tools are being implemented in classes, rubrics and models. We will also use teacher self-assessments using a teacher-generated rubric based on The Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leader has a plan for parent engagement that is Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely. Parent feedback about the parent events and activities thus far have been positive. Based on event attendance our parent participation has averaged around 50%. We currently have a new PTA that is committed to supporting families and the school so that students have a joyful, academically successful middle school experience. The School Leadership Team is also committed to this work. Since their installation, less than a month ago the PTA has curated 2 events. Additionally, they are working with the principal to develop a robust parent engagement calendar. Due to various circumstances, families need different differentiated opportunities to be part of the school community. We will ensure that families have ample opportunities to participate in school events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2018 at least 80% of Middle School 898 Families will have participated in at least 2 school events, as evidenced by event attendance. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We utilize the Remind Text Application, Our website, Jupiter, our on-line grading and communication system, the PTA volunteers to make phone calls, back packed letters home, email and social media to communicate events to parents Parents, Families August 2018-June 2019 Teachers PTA SLT School Leader School Secretary Webmaster We work closely with the Family Leadership Coordinator to implement best practices around family engagement and to ensure that while we do not have a Parent Coordinator, a team member attends Parent Coordinator meetings. Parents Families August 2018-June 2019 Families, School Leader, Family Leadership Coord., We ensure that we use our social media at least 3 times daily to share information, solicit family and community involvement and celebrate the work. We also utilize our tools to ensure that families are aware of district and city wide events for families. Parents Families August 2019- June 2019 School Leader Secretary Parent Coffees-monthly, The State of the School Address-2 times a year, chat and chews and potlucks-bi-monthly, Curriculum night- 1 time a year, workshops,-monthly, school celebrations (literacy celebration, math celebration)- held at the end of each unit, book fair- once a year, awards nights (2 times a year), End of year celebration, September kick off and other events will be held throughout the year. Parents Families Students Community Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement PTA PTA SLT August 2019-June 2019 School Leader School Secretary If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are partnered with Sheltering Arms the SBO that runs our Extended Learning Time. Sheltering Arms, will host ELT showcases and will attend all parent teacher conferences, and school events as well as sponsor the events by 2018-19 CEP 24  providing food and other resources. Classroom Inc. is another partner organization that supports student literacy development and will host parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA fund raising, supports from our CBO will cover the cost of hosting our events. Teachers, ELT staff, PTA and School Leaders will curate,host and implement the events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, family involvement will increase by at least 10% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will utilize the Frame work For Great Schools definition of Strong Family Community Ties to guide our assessment around progress towards this goal. Additionally we will use an in house rubric adapted from Azed.gov to Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records, DRP, Interim Assessments, Progress Reports, Report card grades, In class conferences, teacher observations, On demand writing assessments Curriculum Diagnostics, Performance Tasks, MOSLS, Progress Reports, Report card grades, In class conferences, teacher observations, Exit Slips Curriculum Diagnostics, Performance Tasks Progress Reports, Report card grades, In class conferences, teacher observations, Exit Slips Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson, Just Words, Strategic Reading, Book Clubs, WIN (What I Need) Small group, one on one, tutoring, Expanded Learning time, During ELT, Saturday Academy and during the school day. Word Generation Khan Academy, Sum Dog, Metamorphosis problem solving tasks, Number strings, specialized design instruction Small group, one on one, tutoring, Expanded Learning TIme, During ELT, Saturday Academy and during the school day. Khan Academy Mosa Mack reteach Small group, one on one, tutoring, Expanded Learning TIme, RocketLit passages During ELT, Saturday Academy and during the school day. specialized design instruction Curriculum Diagnostics, Performance Tasks Progress Reports, Report card grades, Wilson, Just Words, Strategic Reading, Social Studies related Book Clubs, WIN (What I Need) Small group, one on one, tutoring, Expanded Learning TIme, During ELT, Saturday Academy and during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 26  In class conferences, teacher observations, Exit Slips NewsELA Khan Academy At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher observation OORS report referralrecord Morningside Restorative Justice curriculum, Circle mediation social history and inquiry strategy meetings around behavior, group workshops Small group, one on one conferences, Expanded Learning time (leadership class) Small group, one on one, mentoring, Expanded Learning time, 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 9 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STh population are involved in all expanded learning time programs. They have all received school supplies and uniforms and will continue to receive supplies as they need them. The cost of all trips and extracurricular activities will be covered. We enlisted the support of community partners and our CBO to provide career coaching, resume writing and financial literacy open to all families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 28  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 29  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We are working with Brooklyn college, Columbia University Teachers College and Baruch College to host student teachers who are in their final phase and will be looking for school placements in June of 2019. This is a good opportunity to see those teachers in our school environment, assess their readiness and fit for our school. Additionally, the School Leader will attend all DOE hiring fairs. Through the RELAY Graduate program the School Leader attends networking events and conferences, an opportunity to meet highly qualified teachers who are looking for placements outside of the Charter School world. We are also, utilizing District supports, by attending district recruitment fairs and also utilizing the districts teacher pipeline as a resource. MS 898 teachers are provided with high-quality coaching, professional development opportunities (in-house and outside), and opportunities to develop ELT and school day electives speaks to their interests. All teachers are supported in working on any "passion projects" with in the school, that supports their interests but also exposes our students to new and different things. MS 898 teachers take advantage of all district wide, BFSC and Citywide professional development opportunities. MS 898 teachers are supported in taking on other roles in the school. This addresses the monotony of doing the same thing all of the time. They get to explore other roles and sharpen skills. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers engage in weekly team meetings, inter-visitations, co-planning and pd time. Professional development ranges from in house to outside PD. Teachers take part in learning groups implemented by the Borough Field Support and other entities. Every MS 898 teacher is working with an outside support person who provides them with a different perspective. Inquiry, data and teacher teams support teachers in understanding and addressing students' learning gaps and their own instructional gaps. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 30  The TA program will support students by providing them with additional instructional supports, during tutoring, Saturday Academies and AM Academies. Students will receive small group instruction and one on one supports during these extednde learning time structures. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are working with Sheltering Arms our CBO to provide students with Extended Learning time which is managed by a Education Specialist (school-day teacher) who will ensure that the after school time is aligned to the school day and is specific to each students; needs. We are also implementing Saturday Learning Cycles in which students will join the cycles based on their learning needs. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 31 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 32   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. <School Name>, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. The Brooklyn Green School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 34  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The Brooklyn Green School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) <School Name> , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 2018-19 CEP 36  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 40  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 41  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 42  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 43 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 44 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, [PRINCIPAL's NAME], testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-2019 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 47  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures and translation resources to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 48  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 49 
