2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K907 School Name: M.S. 907 Principal: COURTNEY MASSENBERG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information MS 907 331900010907 6 School Number (DBN): 19K907` 590 SheffieldAve, Brooklyn, NY 11207 929-397-2967 929-397-2969 Phone Number: Nanette Fuentes Fax: Email Address: nfuentes4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Courtney Massenberg Natasha Carter Thelma Ojeda LoviniaJeffrey DonnettePeters District Information Geographical District: 19 Dr. Thomas McBryde Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Ave, Brooklyn, NY, 11207 Superintendent’s Office Address: tmcbrydejr@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2740 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St, Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name CourtneyMassenberg NatashaCarter ThelmaOjeda N/A DonnettePeters N/A N/A N/A Kenneth Price AyannaFrancis LayaVosges Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Asst. Principal 2018-19 CEP 5  LoviniaJeffrey Elsa Tavarez Monique Davy Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/SLTChairperson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MS 907’s mission is to partner with the community to provide a positive and supportive learning environment that connects challenging academic experiences with robust arts education in order to maximize each student’s potential. We are committed to providing rich learning opportunities that emphasize creativity, communication, collaboration, and critical thinking so that all students can express themselves confidently, make decisions thoughtfully, and grow academically and socially. 2018-19 CEP 9  MS 907’s vision is to support a love of learning in our school community through uniquely tailored learning experiences and rich opportunities for academic and artistic expression. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. MS 907 is located in the East New York section of Brooklyn. We are a new middle school serving sixth graders, and we will grow to grade eight by 2020-2021. As part of the new school development process, we engaged various community members in information-gathering conversations and the school planning process. We learned that the community values collaborative partnership and rigorous academic and extracurricular opportunities comparable to other New York City districts. We also uncovered a desire for arts education that will prepare students for high school, college, and careers. As a result, MS 907 will partner with families and the community to enrich academics with meaningful arts connections. Additionally, students will participate in an extensive Advisory program, which includes daily check-ins, project-based learning, Restorative Circles, and school-wide Community Circle. Our Advisory program will help students learn about themselves and others, build their confidence, and help them find their voice and unique gifts. This will support students' ability to take risks in the classroom and open their minds to arts exploration. MS 907 employs the following instructional philosophy: Students must think, explore, and create every day. To do this, they must be challenged to lead the learning in the classroom by coming up with their own strategies for talking about and presenting new learning. Differentiated opportunities informed by data will support their ability to drive their own learning. At this time, strategic partnerships include Lincoln Center Education's Arts in the Middle program and YMCA SONYC after school program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special education population comprises 27.5% of our total student body (11 out of 40 students). We will implement Academic Intervention Services (AIS), an ICT classroom setting, and regular differentiated instruction to address the needs of this group. Based on last year's standardized ELA and math exam data, 89% of our special education students are performing at a level 1 or 2 in ELA and all of our special education students are performing at a level 1 or 2 in math. We will implement small-group project-based learning experiences that cater to the needs of the like-minded learners in each group. We will also implement AIS and regular differentiated instruction to meet their needs. Our goal is to reduce the number of level 1s and 2s by 50%. As a result, we will implement an instructional focus collaborative conversation and evidence-based writing in all content areas so that students can formulate their thoughts with the help of their peers verbally before committing them to paper. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Challenges : The achievement gap is defined as “the difference between low income and minority students compared to that of their peers on standardized tests” (education.com). This is a challenge that we face since our student enrollment includes a high amount of minorities and high poverty students. Our African American and Hispanic 2018-19 CEP 10  students are on average trailing behind their white peers by more than 20 points. We are faced with the challenge of educating students that are not on grade level in reading and mathematics as a result of living in impoverished areas. We are continually discussing as a school community new ways and opportunities for parents to become more involved in our school and for us to support them with social services. For example, we plan to donate a significant amount of uniforms, fully stocked book bags, footwear and coats to students in need. In addition, we are planning awards ceremonies and assemblies that display our students’ talents and celebrate their academic and social-emotional accomplishments. Strengths: Our teachers are motivated, energized, and excited about building a new school from the ground up. Each teacher comes with specific skill sets and interests, and all are happy to tap into these strengths to participate in our new school development process. Everyone is taking on special projects that will support parent engagement, student achievement, and teacher collaboration. For example, teachers are collaborating to plan and revise unit maps based on data and individual students' learning styles. They are working together to plan AM/PM Check-Ins, Community Circles, and thematic project-based learning experiences. Some will also serve on a PD committee where they will plan learning opportunities that align to their colleagues' self-identified areas for growth or a parent engagement committee where they will discuss with parents specific strategies to increase engagement with both academic and arts experiences. These committees will help develop trust between the school and families and between staff and administration. As a result of these strengths, we are emphasizing the following three areas in the Framework for Great Schools: Supportive Environment, Rigorous Instruction, and Collaborative Teachers. Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths Students are motivated to engage in accountable talk and student discourse.   Collaborative planning occurs between content area teachers and visual arts teacher as well as between content area teachers and special education teacher. Teacher teams emphasize data analysis and lesson plan revision. Both of these collaborative planning experiences occur weekly for a total of four periods. Not only do these experiences foster collegial discussion but they also improve upon the quality of teacher planning and student work.  Rich, mature discussion in and out of the classroom using Accountable talk stems. 2. Priority Needs 2018-19 CEP 11  Streamline the process to monitor lesson and unit plan revision and impact of changes.   Develop shared understandings around the concepts of rigorous instruction, differentiated learning tasks, and integrated co-teaching models.  Create and implement strategy banks that include multiple entry points and Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) strategies to address the needs of our special education population. Identify a literacy focus in instruction for ELLs and IEP students to improve work products and skills level.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will plan and implement standards-based, differentiated learning tasks that allow student choice and connections to the arts as evidenced by modified unit maps for each content area’s curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We are working to implement the following: Teachers  Professional learning calendar  The establishment of a professional learning community where research-based protocols drive collaborative planning sessions.  Grade-wide scaffolds to support student access to complex texts (e.g., graphic organizers, visual aides, peer support (Greene, 2013))  Grade-wide strategies to support writing in all content areas (e.g., color coded texts, accountable talk sentence starters, sentence frames to spark writing (Hermann, 2014))  Grade-wide checks for understanding  Teacher-student conferences to set reading, math, and writing goals based on student work. Before and after samples will be housed in student learning portfolios.  We are looking into a partnership with MSQI to further support our work. September 2018-June 2019 Principal PD Committee Chairs Grade Team Leader We are working to implement AIS periods that emphasize the following: Teachers SWD and ELL students  Push in by special education teacher for the majority of coursework.  Moving students into least restrictive environments.  Consistent teacher collaboration periods. Small grouping/Flexible grouping/Teacher  conferencing (Elbaum et al., 2000).  Use of multiple entry points and explicit modeling of September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teacher Leaders Principal School-Based Liaison strategies for students. Student teaching (student collaboration).   Number and sequence the steps in the task.  Provide visual aids during lessons.  Show and analyze with students exemplar work products.  Allow extended time for students without penalty. 2018-19 CEP 13   Shorten assignments and the number of tasks to focus on mastery of key concepts and standards. Scaffold questions for students.   Use relevant data to differentiate tasks We will promote stronger family and community ties and increases parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes. There will be an open line of communication with parents/guardians. All staff will be available to meet with parents/guardians. We will provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision-making in support of the academic and arts education of their children and foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. To reach our shared goal of student achievement we have instituted an open door policy. Specifically, all caregivers are continually encouraged to visit the school. Every Tuesday teachers are available to meet with parents. Staff, our school-based social worker, and parent leaders will plan and facilitate bi-monthly workshops that support academic and social-emotional growth. Caregivers are also encouraged to join our newly formed Parent Association. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents/Guardians September 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers PA Executive Board SLT Caregivers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Social Worker Principal PA executive board SLT How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We recognize that family and community connections on the middle school level will make a difference in our students’ success. Thus we are working to implement the following:  Parent workshops bi-monthly to teach specific skills and strategies students are learning in class  Awards, events to celebrate their child’s achievements  Use of our website, monthly newsletters, blogs, social media sites  Parent volunteers for projects, arts celebrations, school-wide events and trips, and Curriculum Nights We will engage families through workshops and arts showcases to support their understanding of rigorous instruction, the Common Core, and how MS 907 connects learning to the arts. This will help families support their children at home. In an effort to increase parent involvement and engagement in the area of providing and promoting rigorous instruction, we will ensure that the Title I funds are allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement parent engagement activities. We will provide training/workshops in English and Spanish to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy and math), and to understand city, state and federal standards and assessments. We will utilize the Tuesday Parent Engagement block to hold parent meetings and facilitate collaborative conversations with families. Staff will share information about student progress, the school’s educational program, and other initiatives of the Chancellor. We will provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g., CCLS assessment expectations, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report) and allow 2018-19 CEP 14  parents to provide suggestions during Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings. We will also distribute monthly awards to recognize Core Value Stars of the Month, perfect attendance, and Honor Roll awards will be distributed each semester. These recipients will be acknowledged at PA meetings to increase parental attendance. The following personnel are responsible for implementation and oversight:  Principal  Visual Arts Teacher  PA Elected Officials Administrators   Grade Team Leader   Social Worker School Leadership Team Special Education Teacher Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to meet the goal categorized under rigorous instruction, teachers and staff will need access to and professional development in curriculum, lesson planning, and successful strategies that successfully incorporate the CCLS while meeting the needs of at-risk students. There will also be a mid-year review of student portfolios (curriculum plans and lesson plans) by school leaders and lead teachers to ensure that adequate progress is being made. The following supports are being reviewed for possible implementation: Jupiter Grades   Myon or I-Ready  MSQI The following supports have been or will be implemented:  Performance Task data analysis  After-school SONYC grant   An in-depth study of Domains 1 and 3 from the Danielson Framework for Teaching in order to promote a Summer PD and Curriculum Writing shared understanding of effective and highly effective practices.  All-staff PDs to support curriculum design, revision, and implementation as well as to gather suggestions from colleagues on how to increase the level of rigor and engagement for unit assignments, while making real world connections for students in their content area. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the unit maps for each content area will be standards based and include differentiated tasks. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math and ELA MOSLs Baseline and interim assessments Reading level assessments On-demand writing tasks By February 2019 50% of content area unit maps will be reviewed for revisions and adjustments that better align curriculum to the grade level standards. The updated alignment may include differentiated task measured by checklist/rubrics and the utilization of exemplars. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Strengths  Overall tone of school is supportive and peaceful.  Students participate in daily AM/PM Check-Ins, small group Advisory, and school-wide Community Circle in order to help students learn about themselves and others, build their confidence, and help them find their voice and unique gifts. This will support students' ability to take risks in the classroom and open their minds to arts exploration.  Our school-wide Community Circle emphasizes the development of our core values: awareness, boldness, creativity, collaboration, and determination through teacher and student-facilitated activities.  School social worker is intentionally building relationships with individual students to foster trust and open communication. She will also facilitate staff-facing PD's on classroom de-escalation strategies and student-facing lessons on conflict resolution, puberty, and other social-emotional concerns.  Average attendance rate is 92.6%  My Brother's Keeper and Girl Empowerment Movement implementation- These initiatives provide at-risk youth with opportunities to connect young people with mentoring, support networks, and skills needed to function in society. 2. Priority Needs  Students need support with identifying and articulating their emotions and the related causes. Students need strategies to regulate their emotions. School-wide Data: Students in Temporary Housing: 2% Free Lunch: 85%  Attendance Rate: 92.6%  Economically Disadvantaged:    ELL Population: 2%   Hispanic Population: 32%  African American Population: 66%  Asian Population 2%  Counseling for Mandated and At-Risk Students: 37% SWD Population: 27.5% 2018-19 CEP 17  3. Policies/Practices to Support Whole Child  Advisory program  GEM and MBK mentor programs  impending peer mediation initiative Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of students will answer strongly agree and/or agree on the questions that pertain to the social and emotional well being, academic self monitoring, and student voice on the student surveys by participating in the weekly Community Circle as part of their Advisory program. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We are working to implement the following:  PBIS: Positive Points system  Daily Check-Ins that include inspirational quote  discussion and student goal-setting Inclusion of student-created class pride songs in Community Circle  Twice weekly arts club to promote creativity, leadership, and core value awareness  MBK and GEM- These initiatives provide at-risk youth with opportunities to connect young people with mentoring, support networks, and skills needed to function in society.  YMCA SONYC after school program  Arts in the Middle program  One on one meetings with parents/guardians  Providing families with outside resources Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students -including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students With Disabilities (SWDs), Students With Interrupted Formal Education (SIFEs), and over-age students September 2018-June 2019 Principal Grade team leaders Special education teacher Social Worker Teachers PA President Arts in the Middle and SONYC leadership In order to bridge the gap for targeted groups of students, students with special needs, and targeted students for additional social emotional support, MS 907 will provide the following programs and extracurricular activities:  Mandated and at-risk counseling All students -including English Language Learners (ELLs), September 2018-June 2019 Principal Grade team leaders 2018-19 CEP 19  MBK and GEM initiatives   Lunchtime arts club small-group project-based learning experiences that cater to the needs of the like-minded learners in each group Students With Disabilities (SWDs), Students With Interrupted Formal Education (SIFEs), and over-age students AIS coordinator Special education teacher Teachers Social Worker PA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. MS 907 engages families to support their understanding of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment in order to assist their children at home. In an effort to increase parent involvement and engagement in order to promote a supportive environment, we ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement research-based activities and strategies. We provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children and foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. We utilize the Tuesday Parent Engagement block to reach out to parents and guardians to meet face to face with individual or groups of parents or guardians, conduct telephone conversations, correspond with parents or guardians in writing through letters, emails, and/or grade level newsletters. This allows the school staff to share 2018-19 CEP 20  information about student progress, the school's educational program, the child's social-emotional well-being and other initiatives of the Chancellor. Parents or guardians are invited to academic celebrations, arts showcases, and Lincoln Center family field trips in order to celebrate the child's accomplishments and social-emotional growth. We also distribute awards for Core Value Star of the Month, perfect attendance, and Honor Roll, all of which will be recognized during PA meetings to increase attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our budget reflects our philosophy our students deserve to attend a school that feels fresh, new, welcoming, and outfitted to prepare them for the 21st century. We have budgeted for new furniture, new classroom libraries, new SMART boards for each classroom, and a laptop cart with one set of student laptops. We have also budgeted for a multitude of arts supplies to support our creative arts program. Furthermore, we are currently exploring what instructional resources we should purchase to advance instruction for our Gifted and Talented program. Lastly, we considered what our school will look like at capacity and we purchased some furniture, technology, and instructional resources to support us as we grow. We believe that these purchasing decisions will support students’ ability think, explore, and create while they are learning, which are at the core of our instructional philosophy. To support teachers’ professional growth, we have set aside a substantial amount of our budget for professional learning opportunities. We plan to focus on PD that empowers teachers to plan and deliver differentiated instruction as well as provide multiple entry points to ensure the needs of all learners are met. We will also offer staff PD opportunities on how to analyze student work to support for ELL students and SWD incorporating Universal Design for Learning principles including multiple entry points for lessons and units of study, explicit teaching of vocabulary, scaffolding – including instructional practices and use of graphic organizers, explicit focus on text structure and features, use of native language to enhance reading and writing. We plan to bring in consultants to support this work. We are also prepared to offer our teachers opportunities to attend educational conferences or take online PD courses. We also will be using per session funds to enable teachers to collaboratively plan curriculum maps, engage in lesson study cycles, and/or norm and score baseline and interim assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of students will answer strongly agree and/or agree on the questions that pertain to the social and emotional well being, academic self monitoring, and student voice on the student surveys by participating in the weekly Community Circle as part of their Advisory program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  School-wide Excel tracker noticing each student's behavior trends Frequency of peer mediation sessions Positive Points implementation Student Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths:  Teachers’ schedules are intentionally designed to promote collaborative planning. Each content area teacher meets with the special education and visual teacher weekly to support differentiated instruction efforts and arts and academics connections. Additionally, teachers enjoy a 90-minute block weekly for Teacher Team data analysis and PBL unit planning using Tuning, Consultancy, and/or Student Work Analysis protocols.  As teachers engage in external PD, they will build staff capacity by turnkeying their new learning during  Monday PD sessions. Self-reflection is a key element in improving students’ academic progress. At the beginning of the year teachers complete Growing Teacher Practice document identifying their areas of strength and growth. This tool is critical in our pedagogical practice and improving student’s academic progress.  Teachers collaborated on the design of our lesson plan template, which includes a think-explore-create structure, space to plan arts connections to the content area, space to plan differentiated learning tasks based on data, and more. Teachers regularly use the template that they’ve created. 2. Priority Needs:  Teachers will continue to develop their pedagogy around providing explicit instruction that aligns to each lesson’s learning objective as well as creating differentiated learning tasks.  Teachers will consistently use a student work analysis protocol to ensure that students who tested on a level 1 or 2 last year make adequate progress this year.  Consider using Myon to increase the amount of time spent reading independently daily.  Use Advance Summary Report percentages to determine which Components need the growth building-wide.  Use assessment calendar to build in time to review data and make curricular adjustments to unit maps and lesson plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 23  By June 2019, the teacher team will utilize a data analysis protocol and information from Student Learning Profiles in weekly collaborative planning sessions to create differentiated learning tasks for students who received a level 1 or 2 in the previous year’s ELA and math state assessments as evidenced by 75% of this group making progress on their ELA and math interim assessments. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Leader Common Planning Teams Special Education Teacher Principal Assistant Principal Grade Team Leader Common Planning Teams Principal Assistant Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students with Disabilities:  Audio books, accountable talk prompts, guided reading,  Differentiated assessment criteria for PBL tasks  Directions given in small steps (Gibson, Hasbrouck 2008).  Conference with students regularly (Payne, 2005).  Use Collaborative Team Teaching Strategies  Collaborate to plan lessons and facilitate project based learning in small groups of students with similar learning needs (Dufour, Dufour, Eaker, Karhanek, 2004) September 2018-June 2019 English Language Learners: Teachers  Audio books, accountable talk prompts, guided reading  Differentiated assessment criteria for PBL tasks  Directions given in small steps (Gibson, Hasbrouck 2008).  Conference with student regularly (Payne, 2005).  Use Collaborative Team Teaching Strategies  Collaborate to plan lessons and facilitate project based learning in small groups of students with similar learning needs (Dufour, Dufour, Eaker, Karhanek, 2004)  Data-based book club implementation during Independent Reading block that emphasizes fluency and vocabulary building. General Education Students Performing Below Grade Level: Teachers  Repeated exposure to content and strategies  Opportunities to experience new content via multiple  entry points Intentional developing of prior knowledge before accessing related content  Differentiated assessment criteria for PBL tasks  Directions given in small steps (Gibson, Hasbrouck 2008).  Conference with student regularly (Payne, 2005).  Use Collaborative Team Teaching Strategies September 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Leader Common Planning Teams Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 25  Collaborate to plan lessons and facilitate project based learning in small groups of students with similar learning needs (Dufour, Dufour, Eaker, Karhanek, 2004) To reach our shared goal of improved student achievement we have instituted the following: Teachers Caregivers September 2018-June 2019 School Secretary Principal  Open door policy  Caregiver workshops around CCLS  Tuesday parent engagement conferences  Professional development for all teachers  Collaboration between principal and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We recognize that caregivers and community connections on the middle school level will make the difference in our student’s success. Thus we have committed to the following:  Regular outreach to parents by teachers  Weekly homework assignments requiring caregiver involvement  Communication with caregivers via phone trees, newsletters, SchoolCNXT, school calendars, parent engagement bulletin boards, and regular outreach from teachers  Hosting arts showcases, designing an MS 907 Art Gallery in collaboration with families, and planning family-facing field trips to Lincoln Center. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional development provided by consultants  Myon program  Purchase of research-based test prep materials that will support our students performing below grade level Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the teacher team will utilize a data analysis protocol and information from Student Learning Profiles in weekly collaborative planning sessions to create differentiated learning tasks for students who received 2018-19 CEP 26  a level 1 or 2 in the previous year’s ELA and math state assessments as evidenced by 45% of this group making progress on their ELA and math interim assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA and math interim assessments Student Learning Profiles Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s strengths in effective leadership are:  Monday PD sessions focus on teacher pedagogical areas for growth and teacher requests for development topics.  Researched best practices from workshops and readings turnkeyed by principal and teachers.  Principal seeks and receives mentorship from varying industry experts relevant to her vision for the school.  Teachers collaborate to plan and implement Community Circle Units emphasizing core values.  Teachers work in collaborative teams to support peer-peer learning and professional growth. These teams emphasize deep reflection on student work products and next steps. Based on informal instructional walkthrough data and identified trends in free feedback provided to the staff as a whole, we are prioritizing the following Danielson Components as areas for growth:  Component 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction  Component 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques  Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning  Component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction In addition, we are focusing on:  Use of MOTP data to inform, support and track teacher goals in addition to Growing Teacher Practice tool Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a system will be implemented to align Advance observation data and ratings with teacher pedagogy-improvement goals and related feedback, an inter-visitation cycle, and the professional learning calendar as evidenced by 85% of teachers making progress on the Components that highlight their areas for growth according to their Advance observations. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff professional development with emphasis on designing rigorous tasks that student achievement. Specific, actionable, timely feedback on classroom observations and inter-visitations Teachers September 2018-June 2019 PD Committee Principal     Teachers attend content specific professional development at least quarterly  Consultation committee meetings Assistant Principal Student voice is one of the most important and often neglected aspects of implementing academic and behavioral strategies. Arming students with strategies to assess and reflect on their needs and progress is critical. We are working to provide opportunities for voice in the following ways: Students Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers  Providing student choice in daily instruction    Student-facilitated Community Circles Student-led peer mediation Small group instruction and Academic Intervention Services Regular communication with students and families demonstrates high expectations for student academic achievement. Thus we are committed to the following:  Outreach to parents by teachers  Communication with parents via social media, emails, voicemail, SchoolCNXT( a family communication app accessible on all electronic devices), text messaging, newsletters, calendars, message bulletin boards, and invitations to attend arts showcases and on- and off-campus events 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Teachers Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal PA Executive Board Teachers 2018-19 CEP 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Outreach to parents by teachers  Communication with parents via social media, emails, voicemail, SchoolCNXT, text messaging, newsletters, calendars, message bulletin boards, and invitations to attend arts showcases and on- and off-campus events  During Parent Teacher Conferences, Instructional Family Nights, and other family-facing events, parents will receive information on how students are encourage to think, explore, and create in the classroom, and how we utilize this approach to foster critical thinking, creativity, collaboration, and communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per Diem for coverage for teacher professional development  Possible implementation of Jupiter Grades Staff development provided by consultants   Mentoring partnerships that address the myriad of student interests for in-school and afterschool programming Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a system will be implemented to align Advance observation data and ratings with teacher pedagogy-improvement goals and related feedback, an inter-visitation cycle, and the professional learning calendar as evidenced by 50% of teachers making progress on the Components that highlight their areas for growth according to their Advance observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation reports in Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  We have begun a social media account (Instagram) so families can follow their child’s daily activities in school.  Teachers and the principal reach out to parents weekly on Parent Engagement Tuesdays via phone calls or in-person meetings  We have established a Parent Association, and to encourage parent voice, our first meeting included a discussion of activities/events/programs that the PA should consider prioritizing this year. Priority Needs:  More regular communication with a more diverse group of parents using a variety of strategies (e.g., letters home, phone calls, text blasts, in person meetings)  Parent communications in English and Spanish, including digital communication   Creation and implementation of parent surveys to collect and respond to data around families and Initiation of community-based partnership to further address families’ specific needs students’ specific needs Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of parents will attend and/or participate in the planning or production process of arts events presented each semester in collaboration with AIM (Lincoln Center), SONYC after school program, or another community-based organization that highlights their child’s learning as evidenced by attendance sheets and event program acknowledgements. 2018-19 CEP 31 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Caregivers September 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers Social Worker School Secretary Caregivers September 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers Social Worker School Secretary Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We utilized the research of Ruby K. Payne (2006) to highlight the importance of celebrating community diversity. One way we plan to spotlight our community’s diversity is through our arts showcases and events. Not only will this work honor our students’ heritage, it will also bond families together as they learn about each other’s cultures. Therefore, we will implement the following:  Guest speakers to give presentations on topics of interest to parents  Parent volunteers to participate in the planning and implementation of arts events (e.g., program creation, set or costume design, food preparation for event meals)  Parents contacting parents  Weekend activities, including the sharing of information about district and city-wide events that align to the arts and/or expressed topics of interest by families We realize that regular communication with students and families will encourage more participation in the arts, especially as families learn how this work bolsters their child’s understanding of academic content and overall academic achievement. Thus we are committed to the following:  Regular outreach to parents by teachers  Communication with parents via social media, emails, voicemail, SchoolCNXT, text messaging, newsletters, calendars, message bulletin boards Invitations to parents to attend in-school and out-of school events  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  MS 907 has a 5 year partnership with Lincoln Center School of the Arts and a YMCA/SONYC Afterschool program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We believe the most important resource in a school is the human resource. As a startup we do not have the ability to have all personnel needed ideally to implement our plan so our staff members take on multiple roles. We are also fortunate enough to have two very strong partnerships, both of which are at no cost to us: the Lincoln Center Arts in the Middle program and YMCA SONYC after school program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of parents will attend and/or participate in the planning or production process of arts events presented each semester in collaboration with AIM (Lincoln Center), SONYC after school program, or another community-based organization that highlights their child’s learning as evidenced by attendance sheets and event program acknowledgements. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Sheets Events Programs Parent Engagement Logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) DRP small group Performance Task Assessment materials one-on-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) New School Development periods, small group Advisory periods Performance Task Assessment materials Teacher created materials small group one-on-one tutoring New School Development periods, small group Advisory periods Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students not at proficiency (Levels 1 and 2),DRP scores, running records, teacher assessment and feedback, performance task baseline assessment data All students not at proficiency (Levels 1 and 2),teacher assessment and feedback, performance task baseline assessment data MOSLdata Teacher assessment Social Studies MOSLdata FOSS remediation activities small group Teacher created materials Passport remediation activities Teacher assessment Self-assessment Teacher created materials counseling small group small group New School Development periods, small group Advisory periods New School Development periods, small group Advisory periods New School Development periods, small group Advisory periods At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs peer mediation individual GEM and MBK 2018-19 CEP 34  Teacher recommendations PBIS classroom informal observation annecdotalrecords Silent Reflection (school-wide practice that encourage reflection, action planning, and making ammends) 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide uniforms, tutoring, extra-curricular activities, transportation, counseling, trip and event costs and parent workshops. Students that experience temporary housing are offered many forms of assistance and support. The social worker will reach out to the student and the student's family to provide support and referrals for community services as needed. She will also meet with the student on a needed basis to provide the student continued support in school. The social worker and teachers will create an academic intervention plan if needed. The teacher will closely monitor any academic or emotional changes in the student and maintain regular communication with the social worker. The social worker will refer any student and/or family in need to a Community Based Organization (CBO) for additional support and/or guidance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Attended teacher recruitment fairs  Contacted colleges with teacher preparation programs that match our educational philosophy.  Screen candidates from open market, new teacher finder and personal references that are aligned with our instructional priorities, mission and core values.  Mentoring, peer coaching and PLCs  18-D Hiring Committee that uses a rubric to select the best candidates  Candidates are offered the opportunity to conduct a demo lesson  Teachers are integral in selecting PD that is offered 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Highly Effective teachers are grade team leaders  Teachers turnkey professional development from their area of expertise   Teachers attend professional development conducted by the DOE, District, peer schools, UFT, CUNY and Inter-visitations to other middle schools that exhibit best practices other institutions that foster teacher growth Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. The TA tools and resources will be utilized in the classrooms to enhance literacy and mathematics in all content areas. The teachers will provide specifically designed instruction to targeted students with benchmark assessments and periodic progress monitoring. All resources utilized are research based to improve instruction . 2018-19 CEP 38  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). In addition to the literacy block within the classroom, Title I students will receive an 30-40 minutes of additional intensive one-on-one or small-group reading instruction using research-based literacy intervention materials. These intervention programs are selected by Title I and classroom teachers after a review of research on effective reading intervention programs. Parent workshops are offered each semester focusing on services provided through Title I and how to support student learning. For example, training is provided to parents on how to read to and with their children. Information is provided in the home language for parents with limited English proficiency or an interpreter is provided. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 39  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) school allocation amounts) Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 2018-19 CEP 40  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. MS 907, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. MS 907 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS 907, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 2018-19 CEP 44  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 48  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 49  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 50  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 51 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, [PRINCIPAL's NAME], testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-2019 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 55  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures and translation resources to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 56  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 57 
