2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 20K971 P.S. 971 Principal: RUTH STANISLAUS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 971 School of Math, Science & Healthy Living 332000010971 K - 5 School Number (DBN): 20K971 6214 4 th Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11220 718-765-2200 718-765-2210 Phone Number: Fax: Ruth Stanislaus rstanis@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Ruth Stanislaus Hussain Abdullah Pei Lim Ennie Chin Susan Ye N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn NY 11220 Superintendent’s Office Address: Kcosta@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-630-1633 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauricierede Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn NY 11220 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4960 Phone Number: Fax: 917-445-7448 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ruth Stanislaus Hussain Abdullah Pei Lin Susan Ye Ennie Chin NurysAstudillo Danielle Smerina *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Albert Shao Yama Huang Stacey Blackman XiuFang Tang LizzLema Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS 971, our shared goal is to value and promote student independence and rigorous instruction through inquiry and data collection. It is our mission … ● To develop students who are academically independent, who value learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  ● To implement rigorous instruction that promotes student achievement and academic success for all students including students with disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELL) ● To ensure that successful learning takes place for all our children in an environment of positive mutual respect. ● To support all children academically, socially, physically and emotionally, through mindfulness education. ● To design daily instruction that focuses on Common Core learning, assessments, authentic and critical thinking learning experiences as well as the inquiry process and its implementation. ● To support the staff within our learning community as progressive educators who strive to cultivate their own learning and professional growth as well as make connections to their own learning and student academic development. ● To continue building our network of support through parental involvement and diverse community partnerships. The staff at PS 971 is continuously committed to the educational success and improvement of our school community. Strong, collegial relationships are cultivated as teachers partake in professional learning communities. Within these professional learning communities, teachers are involved in academic decision making, professional collaboration and collectively examining academic goals and student data. Through rigorous instruction, consistent assessments and monitoring, the students of PS 971 will progress and succeed. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 971 is located in the Bay Ridge area of Brooklyn on the cusp of Sunset Park. Our grades range from kindergarten to fifth totaling a population of 354 students. Our largest population being that of our Mandarin speaking students at about 50.8% followed by our Spanish speaking students at 38.5% with a total population of white students at 8.3% and 2.9% of African American students. Our mission at PS971, School of Math, Science and Healthy Living is to ensure that all our children achieve to fulfill their academic, social and physical potential through a structured, rigorous, effective curriculum. This mission will be accomplished through a concise collaboration of communities of families, students, our surrounding community and all staff members in a unified plan. This plan includes a focus of learning through the study of literacy, mathematics, the sciences and the centered study of emotional, social and physical health through mindfulness for children. As we continue to strive towards this goal, we have built a foundation of partnering with many community organizational supports which include The Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Sunset Spark robotics and coding, The New York Historical Society, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Mathematics in the City, Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center, Sustainability-Zero Waste, Common Threads Cooking Program, Cookshop Cooking Initiative, The Center for Family Life (CFL), Brooklyn Conservatory of Music Therapy, and Sanford Harmony Mindfulness. In partnering with these organizations, along with the rigorous academic work we do each and every day, we teach our children the value of what true community means. In addition, we have developed a clear road in aligning our community development with our academic Common Core Standards, progressive teacher growth, connection of parents and continuous assessments in all areas of learning. With all areas connected, we know all our children will ultimately become lifelong learners, solution finders, empowered as future leaders. The curriculum and instruction at PS 971 sets high expectations for all students. Instruction is systematic and explicit focusing on parallel teaching in our ICT classes and small group intensive instruction. It is tailored to meet the needs of all students, including our ELL and Special Needs students and higher level learners in review of all assessments that provide accurate and meaningful data concerning student achievement. As we center our instruction on the triad of Instruction, Assessment Monitoring and Implementation, we have a clear lens on educational success. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our main focus of language service is provided through our ENL collaborative support. In support of this structure, we have four ENL teachers working with specific grades as well as collaborate with classroom/cluster teachers on a weekly basis. We also continue to focus on our Students with Disabilities that total 6.2% of our population. This work is implemented through intensive interventions and prevention strategies by our classroom teachers, Reading Recovery teachers as well as Academic Intervention Services (AIS) teachers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In keeping within the structure of the Framework for Great Schools, 971 has placed a vision this year on continuing to develop our planning and preparation centering around assessment that will enhance rigorous instruction for teachers and students. We will also focus on small group / parallel teaching to maximize instruction. We will maintain a focus of inquiry through the study of selected students in all grades as well as developing a system for school wide inquiry strategies implementation. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K971 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 357 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 8 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 88.0% % Reduced Lunch 44.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 44.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 48.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 29 96.9% 4.2% 10.9% 1.1% 46.8% 0.0% 2 6% 5.8 46.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the past, our QR and Principal's performance review has indicated that our school needed to improve on the engagement of variety of learners, including English Language Learners and Students with Special Needs in lessons and scaffolded instruction to enable the school to close the achievement gap of rigorous instruction. Additionally, the ELA state exams continue to show gaps within our school performance comparable to the city. In the area of ELA, we had --- of students performing at levels 3 & 4. In order to ensure that the curriculum is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core we have indicated several systems that are currently in place at our school to support these areas of need that will be reflected in our action plan and goals for the 2018-2019 school year. STRENGTHS:  Students will continue to be assessed in reading through Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) as the main form of assessment, MOSL and ELA periodic assessments.  We have developed an online system of data tracking through Google DRIVE that will continue to be utilized school-wide to systemically create coherence within the school. Teachers are continually uploading their lesson plans and revising their instruction that is driven by data from the drive.  Differentiated word study curriculum: Fundations for K-2 students and Instructional vocabulary study for   grade 3-5 students Students are accountable for their own learning by using student friendly rubrics, student checklists and student to student accountable talk as well as student goal-notebooks where students write their weekly goals in literacy and math Students and teachers are engaged in pre and post assessments, as well as, ongoing assessments for each unit, which inform students of what they know  A Reading Recovery program and Academic Intervention Services (AIS) are in place to support our students who are currently reading 2-3 years behind grade level  AIS programming consists of in-classroom support and after school intensive program focusing on students who are currently reading 2-3 years behind grade level  Arts Intervention to promote reading and writing within the study of art  Stand-Alone and Integrated English as a Second Language Instruction-Teachers are planning collaboratively and using several collaborative team teaching models when working with ENL specialists, AIS teachers and Coaches.  Reading Music as well as the study of classical composers and cultural connections.  Literacy Centers/Strategy Groups and small group instruction as well as guided reading 2018-19 CEP 13   Integration of The New York Historical Society, which is a school wide and grade wide Social Studies Enrichment program. Through this program, museum educators work with every class and every teacher each month over the course of the school year, delivering a hands-on Social Studies program that aligns with the Social Studies Scope and Sequence and the Common Core Learning Standards for each grade. PRIORITY NEEDS  The integration of a data tracking protocol with a specific lens on Inquiry that will allow consistent and responsible collaborative data collection and analysis. Intensive small group instruction using AIS staff focusing on level 2 students   Professional Development plan that includes effective small group instruction such as guided reading and strategy skills groups in the areas of reading and writing specifically focusing on improving SWD levels of learning  Professional Development in the area of strategically planning curriculum that will define rigorous instruction in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% (69 out of 173) of grade 3-5 students will increase in reading, writing and mathematics content by 3 levels. This will happen through instructional support & scaffolds and the alignment of the Common Core. We will specifically focus on students with disabilities, ELL and high performing students. This will be measured by the levels of progress on the 2019 State exam and the increase of our September, January and May school wide Fountas and Pinnell (running records) as well as the progress of student's Math periodic assessment results administered in September 2018, January and May 2019. This will be monitored using our MONTHLY benchmark data collection system as well as teacher's instructional classroom observations (Advance components 1E and 3D) 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project (TC)- Continue to implement a newly acquired curriculum that is aligned to the CCLS and the Framework for Great Schools (FGS) with a strong focus on rigorous instruction and raising the level of vocabulary and strategies to differentiate support our ELL and SWD population. Partnership with TC Staff Developers during the 2018-2019 school year for grades K-5. GOOGLE DRIVE data collection system will be used to monitor reading and writing levels. This also includes baseline, benchmark and check-in points for teachers. Data progress will be used as a part of our data analysis protocol. We will focus on Advance Literacy Key Shift 1 ( Strengthening the instructional core) and Key Shift 2 (Placing data at the center of literacy improvement) as a means to increase student achievement and performance. Interventions include retaining an additional AIS support person, morning RISE focus instruction and collaborative instructional teams. Teachers Students Parents Teachers Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 (4 TC units throughout the year) October 2018-June 2019 Administrators TC Staff Developers AIS Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals Coaches ENL Team Assessment Team Administrators TC Staff Developers AIS Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 15  We will analyze the 2018 New York State English Learning Arts Exam and select noticeable trends within our student’s performance. Teachers Paraprofessionalsl Beginning October 2018-June 2019 Coaches ENL Team Assessment Team Curriculum Team Administrators AIS Support Staff Students Teachers Paraprofessionals Coaches ENL Team Inquiry Team Vertical Inquiry Team Assessment Team Administrators AIS Support Staff Teachers Prioritize standards that reflect significant gaps between the school’s performance and the city’s overall performance and create “Priority Focus” that will raise the level of rigorous instruction. Implement school wide “Priority Focus” (K – grade 5) based on data analysis and create a priority standards matrix that provides teachers with opportunities to exam and analyze data to adjust instruction and improve student achievement. Continue implementing our INQUIRY TEAM process targeting SWD. Continue to design class schedules to accommodate AIS teachers and Coaches that will push into classrooms using the Collaborative Team protocol. The focus will be on planning and preparation techniques that will allow teachers to receive support in planning effective units and lessons to improve student achievement. Students determined to be At-Risk based on Local and School Assessments Weekly schedules from Oct. 2018- June 2019 ELL Students Paraprofessionals SWD students Coaches Implement the "Morning R.I.S.E” project four mornings per week for grades three, four and five with a focus on supporting students in ELA and Math exam preparation, strategies, techniques and test articulation. Grades 3-5 Oct. 2018 Administrators Focus: May 2019 AIS Support Staff "Morning R.I.S.E" will be taught primarily by grades 3-5 teachers in order to gather data and implement assessed needs into daily instruction resulting on student achievement. At-Risk students Teachers ELL Students Paraprofessionals SWD students Coaches Teachers Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 16 Monthly "Parents as Learning Partners" (PLP) will be organized and allow parents to visit their child's classroom to participate in and support reading, math, writing or art activities. There will be a specific focus on all SWD parents. At-Risk students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators ELL Students AIS Support Staff SWD students Teachers Teachers Paraprofessionals Paraprofessionals Coaches Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019, at least four workshops will be provided by Instructional coaches, guidance counselors and AIS teachers to help introduce and support parents with strategies to help support their children at home in regards to reading and vocabulary attainment. In addition, our ENL team will provide workshops for parents supporting them with parent friendly vocabulary supports for work at home (Advanced Literacy Key Shift #1) as well as provide informational workshops on school wide strategies and classroom instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers, Reading Recovery specialists, ENL teachers, AIS teachers, Data specialist. Principal, consultants, outside educational organizations.  Google DRIVE data collection system  Professional development will be given to staff during our Monday sessions centering around priority focus students.  Creating Title III Supplemental programs for the ELLs in the form of project R.I.S.E after school program.   Monday Inquiry team meetings to analyze student work of ELL and SWD students each week. Implementation of PLC's for staff to collaborate in planning and curriculum development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark 2018-19 CEP 17  By February 2019, at least 40% (69 out of 173) of students including ELL, SWD and higher performing students in grades 3-5 will increase in reading and writing by 2 levels and 2 levels in mathematics. This will be assessed and analyzed through using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment system and math periodic assessments (January), and end of mathematics unit benchmark. The analyzed student data will be used to adjust and continue instruction. Time frame September 2018-February 2019- Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data collection and analysis of Fountas and Pinnell running records and reading level results of K-5 students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In continuing the use of our QR indicator 1.1 we strive to improve on engaging all students including our diverse learners of ELL students, SWD and higer performing students through instructional scaffolds . This focuses on a culture of equity and excellence through supporting students with high expectations, specific instruction, scaffolds and small guided groups as stated in Advance Literacy Key Shifts 1 & 2. Additionally, the ELA and Math state exams continue to show gaps within our school performance comparable to the city. In the area of ELA, only 48.91% of students performed at levels, 3 & 4. In the area of Math, only 46.52% of our students performed at levels 3 & 4. In order to ensure that the curriculum is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core we have indicated several systems that are currently in place at our school to support these areas of need that will be reflected in our action plan and goals for the 2018-2019 school year. STRENGTHS:   Students will continue to be assessed in reading through MOSL, using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark system of running records and TC unit assessments in writing. Students in grades K-5 will be assessed in mathematics through the Engage NY unit assessments as well as periodic NYC Mathematics Performance Tasks.  Engage NY for mathematics grades K-5  Google DRIVE online system will continue to be utilized school-wide to systemically create coherence within the school. Teachers are continually uploading their lesson plans and revising instructions that is driven by drive data.  Working with the RTI process to identify students with specific instructional needs in reading, writing and      mathematics. Identifying teachers needing support in planning effective instruction to meet the needs of our priority focus students. School-wide data system is placed through the use of Google DRIVE online system Students are accountable for their own learning by using student friendly rubrics, student checklists and accountable talk in the area of mathematics Students are guided to monitor their own learning through our student goal-book system Students and teachers are engaged in ongoing check-ins and benchmark assessments for each unit inform instructional next steps  Academic Intervention support groups (AIS) are in place to support our students who are currently behind grade level in reading, writing and mathematics  Arts Intervention to promote mathematical conceptual thinking through the study of art and art theory 2018-19 CEP 19   Stand-Alone and Integrated English as a Second Language Instruction-Teachers are planning collaboratively and using several collaborative team teaching models such as parallel teaching and small guided group when working with ENL specialists, AIS teachers and Coaches.  Reading Music and understanding the mathematical systems behind music theory  Continue the New York Historical Society (NYHS) program, which is a school wide Social Studies Enrichment program. Through this program, museum educators work with every class and teachers weekly over the course of the school year.  NYHS will continue delivering hands-on Social Studies program that aligns with the Social Studies Scope and Sequence and the Common Core Learning Standards for each grade. Investigations within the math curriculum through the use of "Context for Learning Investigations".   Continue parent workshops in the area of math, literacy, ELL’s and SWD’s support, progress preparation, and homework implementation  Continue focusing on the implementation of the Sanford Harmony social-emotional program for students  Implementation of mindfulness initiatives such as yoga and support groups PRIORITIES:   Studying and analyzing the inquiry process and the data results for school wide systematic change. Integration of a data reviewing protocol in order to develop responsible data analysis and collaborative support teams for specific areas  The continued development of Professional Development plan that includes effective small group instruction such as guided and strategy skill groups in the area of reading, writing and math  Developing Centers/Strategy Groups for intensive instruction given by classroom teacher and outside collaborative support.  Professional Development in the area of strategically planning instruction that will define rigorous goals in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools and Equity and Excellence for all students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the academic school year June 2019, PS 971 will show evidence of supportive environments for 100% of students. This will specifically focus on 100% of AIS students including SWD and English Language Learners, as well as higher performing students. All students will build academic language skills through continuous small group instructional support and teacher to students conferencing in alignment with AL Key Shift 1 & 2. This will also include analysis of student work from weekly Inquiry team meetings and collaborative teams. In addition, we will continue with the Sanford Harmony Social-Emotional learning program as a means of support for all students with a focus on SWD and ELL students. Student progress will be measured through monitoring of a weekly Inquiry data collection system, teacher observations and feedback using the Advance Rating system domains 2 and 3 and the 2018-2019 MOSL benchmark assessments given in September, December, March and May. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). NY ENGAGE Math Curriculum and Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment and Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project curriculum- Teachers Daily: Administrators Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018- Support Staff Students June 2019 Teachers Continue to implement curriculum that is aligned to the CCLS and the Framework for Great Schools. Coaches This focus on rigorous differentiated instruction for SWD and ELL students with a need in reading, writing and math to support instruction of our population. GOOGLE DRIVE data collection system that includes baseline, benchmarks and check-ins for teachers. Data progress will be reviewed four times throughout the year. Paraprofessionals Rel. Service Monthly Providers Sept. 2018-June 2019 TC Staff Developers ENL Teachers AIS Staff Coaches Analyze the 2017-2018 New York State Mathematics Exam results and select noticeable trends within our students performance specifically focusing on target population SWDs and AIS students. Teachers Baseline Administrators Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 Support Staff Reviewing and analyzing data reflecting significant gaps between the schools performance and the city’s overall performance to create “Priority Focus ” points. We will continue to focus on teacher collaboration and planning teams in areas such as assessments, instructional, social-emotional and events planning. This will also support the Great Schools Framework for supportive environment and the Equity and Excellence Initiatives. Students Benchmark Teachers Coaches Jan. 2019 Paraprofessionals Benchmark Rel. Service Providers May 2019 TC Staff Developers ENL Teachers AIS Staff 2018-19 CEP 21  Continue implementing our INQUIRY TEAM and Vertical Team process each week with a target group of SWD and AIS students. Continue implementing our 'Boys and Girls' support group for students in grades 3-5 Continue to design class schedules to accommodate AIS teachers, Coaches, support staff, guidance counselors and ENL teachers that will collaborate with classroom teachers using the Collaborative Team protocol and Professional Learning Community approach. There will also be a focus on planning and preparation techniques to allow teachers to receive support in planning effective units and lessons to improve student achievement. Coaches Guidance Counselor Mindfulness Team Inquiry Team Students Sept. 2018 - Administrators Teachers June 2019 Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals Rel. Service Providers ENL Teachers AIS Staff Coaches Guidance Counselor Mindfulness Team Inquiry Team Implement “Morning R.I.S.E” project four days per week for grades three, four and five with a focus on supporting students in Mathematical and ELA exam preparation strategies and techniques and articulation. Morning R.I.S.E will be taught primarily by grades 3-5 teachers. Data will be gathered, analyzed and implemented to focus on high level 2 and high level 3 students and ultimately, all student's progress. Grades 3-5 4 mornings Administrators AIS Students SWD per week October 2018-May 2019 Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals Rel. Service Providers ENL Teachers AIS Staff Coaches Inquiry Team 2018-19 CEP 22  Continue to organize parent workshops during the school year focusing on the essentials of an effective learning environment at home and at school. This will include: Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators Paraprofessionals Support Staff Supporting students during state tests   Understanding the levels of learning a new language  How to identify learning disabilities  How to help with homework  How do we learn how to read  Mathematics strategies Students Coaches Weekly "Case Conferences" Special Education Intervention Team (SIT) meetings; SWD Teachers  Track progress on SWD through analyzing data.  Sharing resources to be implemented in and out of the classrooms.  Collaborative goals created by the teams to meet individual student needs Weekly meetings- Sept. 2018- June 2019 Weekly Pupil Partnership Team (PPT) meetings SWD  To discuss and track progress on students at-risk AIS Students   through analyzing data. Sharing resources to be implemented in and out of the classrooms. Students currently in the RTI process to determine if they will need further intensified intervention (i.e. Tier II or Tier III and/or possible referrel Weekly meetings Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL Teachers AIS Staff Coaches Guidance Counselor SIT Team Administrators Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals Rel. Service Staff Coaches Social Emotional Team Inquiry Team OT PT Guidance Counselor SIT Administrators Support Staff Teachers Paraprofessionals Rel. Serv. Providers Coaches Social Emotional Team 2018-19 CEP 23  Inquiry Team OT PT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019, at least four workshops will be provided to families by Instructional coaches, guidance counselors and AIS teachers to help introduce and support parents with strategies to help support their children at home, academically and emotionally. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, Data specialist, Math Coach, Principal, consultants, outside educational  organizations. Integration of the data review protocol system to analyze the implementation of CCLS and the Framework for Great Schools.  Google DRIVE data collection system  Professional development will be given to staff during Monday professional development time, outside workshops and inside school workshops  Creating Title III Supplemental programs for the ELLs in the form of an enrichment after school program.  Implementation of school wide teams for staff to collaborate in planning and curriculum development for academic achievement and social emotional well being  Monday Inquiry team meetings to analyze student work of ELL and SWD students. The alternate Mondays will focus on professional development on instruction and mindfulness  Professional development in mindfulness and emotional support for students  Partnership with district liaison in social emotional support training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a September baseline, and December benchmark of the mathematical and literacy performance of our English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and AIS students will be assessed for progress. 15% of students will increase in reading and mathematics. This will be accomplished through the use of the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark assessment in reading. Running records assessment results will be analyzed for student progress in areas of coding, conferring and student explanations. This will also be done through mathematical periodic 2018-19 CEP 24  assessments, unit assessments and benchmark assessments in ELA and mathematics grades 3-5. The results from this data collection system will be used as a check in point as well as to adjust instruction. Time frame September 2018-February 2019- Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our specific instrument of measure to assess progress is the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment system using and analyzing student running records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In continuing the use of our QR indicator 1.1, we strive to improve on engaging all students including our diverse learners of ELL students through scaffolding our instruction and enhancing the rigor in accordance with the Framework for Great Schools. We also noticed over the past three years, although we dipped the year (29%) before last, we have risen to achieve the highest results in ELA of 48%, 1% higher than the city. We also noticed that in order for students to progress a focus must be placed on planning and preparing rigorous instruction and student engagement in small and parallel groupings. STRENGTHS:  Using our data review protocol system, examining the trends across the NYSESLAT modalities to show the needs of ELL students  Collaboration between classroom teachers to develop teaching methodology  Teachers collaborate with each other by sharing resources and lesson plans through weekly common sharing periods, Google Docs and emails  Google online is used throughout the school for all teachers to share unit plans, lesson plans, assessments and data analysis of the assessments with our ENL staff Fountas and Pinnell reading level assessments used to analyze student reading progress   Teacher-created classroom assessments along with pre and post unit reading assessments  Aligning student assessments with the CCLS   Daily common "sharing" periods for grade-level alignment to collaborate on effective instructional strategies  Universal Design for Learning (UDL) professional development for all teachers focusing on small group and Students will continue to be assessed using periodic assessments guided group strategies Implementing the Morning R.I.S.E program focusing on test taking strategies and articulation  PRIORITIES:  Become a Teachers Reading and Writing Project school collaborating with TC staff developers during the year  To continue ongoing professional development sessions on small group and guided instruction during Monday professional development time.  Continued weekly rotation cycle meeting with Literacy Coach with classroom teachers to focus on planning and preparation of effective lessons  Professional Development in the area of strategically planning curriculum that will define rigorous instruction in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools specifically for our ELL students.  Developing collaboration sessions with classroom teachers and ENL teachers in order to support and develop language acquisition strategies and techniques for daily instruction. 2018-19 CEP 26   Use and integrate instructional webinars for teacher support in small group and guided instructional strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in order to improve student outcome and school performance, 100% of all teachers at PS 971 will collaborate through organized collaborative teacher teams. School wide teams will strengthen the instructional core through Inquiry teams focusing on specific inquiry students (SWD and ELL students), Rotation teams consisting of grade bands and coaches and school wide teams (assessment, curriculum, parent event, student events, wellness and sustainability). This will be measured through data from baseline and benchmark performance assessments of inquiry team students September, January and May. Data will be monitored, examined and analyzed in order to view trends of needed areas and support for teachers. Evidence of teacher collaboration will also be measured in 1E coherent instruction and 3D using assessment using the Teacher Advance rubric system. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue to analyze baseline and benchmark All Teachers Weekly analysis: Administrators Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 Support Staff Teachers June 2019 Paraprofessionals Rel. Serv. Providers Coaches assessments of all students to examine reading and writing levels in order to inform instructional decisions for more rigorous instruction  Grade K-5 classroom teachers will work with TC staff developers as Reading and Writing lab sites  Professional development for teachers in Engage NY Mathematics, Vocabulary and Fundations as well as NYC Social Studies Passport curriculum  Using the analyzed results from data to develop priority focus points. This will result in explicit guided instruction for the needed areas of students. Teachers will receive professional development on data analysis to inform effective instruction  ENL teachers will receive professional development on implementing a new language-based curriculum geared towards ELL student’s area of need in reading and writing. This will also include instructional modalities that reach every learning style  Using the English as a New Language Learning Standards to drive instruction will be implemented. In turn aligning our instruction to the Framework of 2018-19 CEP 28  Great Schools and its emphasis on student support and rigorous instruction. Creating Title III Supplemental programs for ELLs in the form of project R.I.S.E after school that will focus on the NYSASLAT assessment, zooming in on student NYSESLAT needed skills and strategies. Certified ENL Teachers Two days weekly Oct. 2018 Administrators Support Staff Teachers May 2019 Continue implementing at least 2 evening workshops during the year for ELL parents as a means to promote strategies that can be used at home to support ELL students. ENL staff will also schedule on-going meetings with ELL parents in order to share progress and student goals. ELL students Parents of ELL students Paraprofessionals Rel. Serv. Providers Coaches Continued collaboration of the ENL Team to focus on analyzing ELL assessments, progress of all ELL students and implementation of strategies and techniques into daily instruction. Teachers At-Risk students Weekly team meetings: Oct. 2018 Administrators Support Staff Teachers May 2019 ENL Teachers ENL team and classroom teachers will participate in professional development on implementing ELL strategies and techniques into effective instruction. Paraprofessionals Rel. Serv. Providers Utilization of Monday professional development sessions will be used as a time to provide teachers, paraprofessionals and related service provider training around implementing small group and guided group strategies to foster rigor and success. In order for explicit professional development of curriculum and lesson planning we will continue rotation cycles with coaches and ICT teacher cycles, grade 3-5 teacher cycles, K-2 teacher cycles and Special Needs teacher cycles. ENL team will participate in rotation cycles. Classroom teachers plan differentiated instruction based on lesson collaboration with ENL teachers during common sharing time. Teachers Paraprofessionals Students Weekly Monday meetings: Sept. 2018 Coaches Administrators Support Staff Teachers June 2019 ENL Team Paraprofessionals Rel. Serv. Providers Coaches Weekly scheduled meetings: Sept. 2018 June 2019 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Workshops each month between October 2018 to June 2019 will be provided by Instructional coaches, guidance counselors and ICT co-teachers to help introduce and support parents with learning strategies specifically to help support reading and writing strategies at home. Workshops will also be given in the area of understanding formative assessments as well as understanding how our daily curriculum supports our daily teaching and learning (AL Key Shift 3) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers, Reading specialists, ENL teachers, Data specialist. Principal, outside educational organizations.  The data review protocol system to analyze the implementation of CCLS and the Framework for Great Schools Google  DRIVE data collection system  Professional development webinars and online tutorials from educational consultants for all teachers  Creating Title III weekly supplemental programs for the ELLs in the form of a project R.I.S.E afters school program.  Monday Inquiry team meetings to analyze student work of ELL students.  Monday professional development meetings for all staff in the area of reading, writing and mathematical strategies and skills as well as small/guided instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark By February 2019, the academic performance of our students will be assessed for progress through the use of the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment system, benchmark end of unit assessments and the NYC Mathematics Performance Task. Assessment results will be analyzed by teacher teams and the data review protocol system. Teachers will meet in February to analyze benchmark data to inform future instruction Time frame September 201-8February 2019- Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 30  Data collection and analysis of Fountas and Pinnell reading levels, end of unit assessments and NYC Mathematics Performance Task. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 971’s current focus is on continuing our school wide systems of effective data analysis informing our planning and preparation and small group instruction that will lead to academic rigor, student progress and transparency within the academic community. We have incorporated multiple systems:   Implementation of Professional Learning Community cycles (Rotation) focusing on planning and preparation. Informal/Formal observations focusing on component 1E designing coherent instruction and 3D using assessment in instruction in the Advance Rating System  Google DRIVE online system that is utilized to record and collect data. Administrators and teachers are able to create, edit and upload information for data analysis.  Coaches provide services to support classroom teachers and provide feedback to administration in order to promote a supportive nurturing environment. Strengths  Mathematics and Literacy Coach as well as AIS teachers will continue to support staff in daily instruction, operational procedures and implementation of best practices. A specific focus has been placed on planning and preparation for explicit small group / guided group instruction for At-Risk students, ELLs and SWDs in our learning community   Walk-through's and informal feedback is given besides the Advance observations as a means of on-going support for all staff with a focus on planning and preparation and small group / guided group instruction. Learning communities use the Google DRIVE on-line data collection system. Data is uploaded and shared amongst the staff, this allows for transparency expectations and a coherent school wide vision. School website is structured around planned school wide events and best practices performed in our community for transparency and coherence.   A weekly newsletter is sent to staff outlining expectations on specific focus points each week such as 'Principal's message' focusing on small group /guided groups, for planning and preparation as well as a 'kudos' section highlighting glows of staff members. PRIORITIES: .  Continue the rotation cycle that has been implemented for groups of teachers to meet with coaches focusing on planning and preparing lessons and curriculum.  Continue with Mindfulness Monday's in order to promote social-emotional understanding and well being  Ongoing instructional support and observational feedback has been given to teachers through the Advance system.  Data teams focusing around gathering and analyzing data to support daily instruction, explicit small groups  Professional development has been given in the area of planning and preparation and aligning CCLS to the work of daily instruction. 2018-19 CEP 32   Professional development will continue in the area of planning and preparation in order to promote best practices in explicit small group instruction, and a productive learning environment.  Weekly assigned common planning periods with Coach/ Administration support.  Alternate weekly planning with ENL teachers and AIS teachers in improve instructional strategies implemented into daily instruction.  Continue to focus Monday professional development on Inquiry meetings and training on small group / guided instructions for all levels of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 971 teacher performance will increase in the Advance Rating System in components 1E (designing coherent instruction) and 3D (using assessment in instruction) by 40 % (at least 13 teachers out of 32) from developing to effective and effective to highly effective This will be measured through the Advance Rating System observations, prompt feedback conversations to teachers, results of analysis of INQUIRY team's student work, and analysis of student work during common planning sessions . 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers First and second year teachers new to teaching and the school community Benchmark periods Principal Dec. 2018 Administrative Team March 2019 Teachers May 2019 Paraprofessionals Guidance Counselor Coaches  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to use the data review protocol, professional learning communities will be integrated school wide beginning with the administrative leadership team then selecting specific focus teams that will result in: · Promoting leaders of tomorrow · Development of a Problem of Practice for staff to work on during the school year. · Analysis of instruction and pedagogy · Building responsible assessments and data focusing on priority areas of need. · Effectively use the data review protocol tools. Continue to develop and implement support meetings with teacher with at least three check in points across the year. Focus on supporting teachers that are new to the profession and the learning community through the development of a new teacher team. Gather and analyzed data using Google DRIVE online system for all teachers.  Becoming a Teacher's College school and retaining Teachers staff developers to work with K-5 classroom teachers.  Continue implementing MONDAY INQUIRY teams focusing on selected At-Risk, SWD and ELL students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Paraprofessionals Lead Teachers 2018-19 CEP 34 Coaches TC Staff Developers Teachers ENL Team Data Specialist  to improve school wide instruction and student achievement. In keeping in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools and its goal of teacher collaboration, MONDAY INQUIRY time will also be divided into grade level inquiry work that will allow classroom teachers to meet to analyze student work, research strategies and system wide change. Coaches, Students  This time will also include collaborating with ENL specialists, AIS teachers, coaches and mentors for support on instructional best practices.  Tuesday’s Parent Connect time will continue to focus on parents conferences in addition to continuing other professional work dedicated to the achievement and progress of our students.  The alternate weeks of Monday professional development work will be dedicated to school wide "sharing" allowing for classroom teachers to share plans with out of classroom teachers and coaches. This time will allow for collaboration and planning improvements.  Provide Professional development around Inquiry and examining student work with a focus on explicit small group instruction. Implement the use of the Atlas protocol for teacher team meetings   Retain educational webinars that will focus professional development on planning and preparation and data collection/ analysis.  Retain educational webinars that focus on explicit small group and guided group instruction  Develop professional learning times that will allow teachers to facilitate and lead PD for whole staff. Continue to implement additional weekly common "sharing" periods for teachers to collaborate, share and adjust plans. Teachers Weekly: Sept. 2018 Administration Continue utilizing School Net to build and align assessments that will focus on all learners including At-Risk, SWD's and ELL students. At-Risk, SWD and ELL students June 2019 Pupil Partnership Team (PPT) will continue to be structured around our Guidance Counselor, Classroom Teachers, SBST, Coaches and Related support staff and meet weekly to discuss and implement strategies and techniques within an RTI system for teachers to implement effective daily instruction to our SWD and At-Risk students. Teachers Students Weekly Sept. 2018 June 2019 Teachers Coaches Teachers Rel. Service Providers Data Specialist Administration Guidance Counselor Teachers 2018-19 CEP 35 Monthly PTA leadership meetings will be held to support school wide events, school activities and daily learning in classrooms. Our SLT and PTA will collaborate in at least 3 meetings to organize sub committees of parents to support our school in organizing events that promote student achievement and academic progress. Parents Students Teachers Sept. 2018 June 2019 AIS Teachers SBST Coaches Teachers Rel. Service Providers Administration Teachers Coaches Parents Guidance Counselor AIS Teachers Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Workshops each month from October 2018 to June 2019 will be provided by Instructional coaches, guidance counselors and ICT co-teachers to help introduce and support parents with learning strategies specifically to help support SWD and At-Risk students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers, Reading specialists, ENL teachers, Coaches, Data specialist, Guidance Counselors and Principal.  Google DRIVE data collection system that will guide our planning and preparation.  Professional development will be given to staff based on teacher’s needs and the school-wide focus of planning and preparation/ assessment analysis. In addition, goals set from initial planning conferences will be a focused areas for teacher improvement.  Monthly meetings for staff to collaborate in planning and curriculum development in the setting of a PD planning team. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark By February 2019, we will increase teacher performance and pedagogy within planning and preparation by 20% (7 out of 32 teachers) This will be measured through analysis of the Advance evaluation system as well as analysis of walk through and feedback communication. Time frame September 2018-February 2019- Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A review of the Advance Teacher Evaluation system. Collection of agenda's and use of data collection protocol system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 971 has incorporated multiple parent workshops across the year in the area of nutrition & health, common core learning, test prep, homework, and activities to do in New York City during the summer break. These workshops are accompanied with a booklet on the specific topic printed in English, Spanish and Mandarin. However, improvement is necessary in providing parents with support in academic communication. We would like to support our parents in understanding the expectations of the academic and rigors learning that take place in our community. Strengths:  School website listing all school functions and a direct line to our parent coordinator for instant support for parents.  Use of the Remind App for parents to receive school information via texts  Parent workshops focusing on literacy, math, state testing, language acquisition, arts & crafts, homework help as well as community service connections.  Monthly parents as learning partners (PLP) focused on monthly theme such as math, reading and writing. Parents are invited to spend the morning in their child’s class collaborating in the themed area.  Classes have publishing parties where parents are invited to read published student work  Annual Harvest Breakfast – a school wide function in October to represent ‘the harvest’ of healthy living. Parents bring food and classroom activities take place in all classes for parents and students to collaborate in.  Annual Holiday Potluck dinner organized by our PTA. A December event celebrating the holidays and the work we have done thus far.  Cultural month where we celebrate our many culture. We begin with Chinese week (due to the Chinese New Year) followed by Spanish week. We end with Multi-cultural week where all cultures are celebrated and a culmination of cultures is celebrated through a morning of activities.  A winter and spring concert is organized for grade K-5 where parents join together to celebrate the schools musical learning.  Annual field day where parents support students in games and activities  The implementation of "Parent Points" a point system for parent involvement resulting in families receiving awards at the end of the year. PRIORITIES:  As a form of surveying the parents, Google DRIVE online system is used to track all parent meetings, activities and planning teachers are doing for parents.  Work with PTA to collaborate on parent needs in regards to school involvement and articulation. 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 academic school year, parent engagement and sub committees involvement will increase by 10% (36 parents) This increase will be achieved by June 2019 and measured by the School Environmental Survey and ongoing Parent Surveys provided to parents throughout the year as well as parent sign in sheets and our school wide parent involvement data drive. 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue developing an ongoing system for feedback for staff and parent on social-emotional workshops, school wide events and instructional data collection of student achievement. Teachers Parents Oct. 2018 June 2019 Principal & Parent Coordinator Continue to facilitate parent workshops in Special Needs and Related Services describing the breakdown of the process and strategies parents can use to help their children at home. Continue to develop parent workshops that focus on parent needs with academic learning as well as social learning. Continue facilitating events that will support parent involvement on a daily basis as well as a social basis. (4 parent workshops Oct. Jan. Mar. May) Staff Parents Staff data day at the end of six week cycles Teachers Parents Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal Students (3 parent workshops Nov. Feb. March) Parent Coordinator Teachers Guidance Counselor Rel. Service Providers Coaches Surrounding CBO's PTA SLT Build collaboration between our PTA/SLT and staff members through school meetings. Parents Staff Students Sept. 2018 June 2019 Principal Parent Coordinator (Bi monthly PTA meetings) Teachers Surrounding CBO's 2018-19 CEP 40 Develop classroom parents as liaisons for school / parent communications. Parents Staff Students Sept. 2018 June 2019 PTA Executive Board SLT Parents Principal (Monthly parents as partners collaboration) Parent Coordinator Teachers Surrounding CBO's PTA Executive Board Continue with our "Parent Point" system where parents gain points for attending meetings and events throughout the school year that results in awards being given at the end of the year. Parents Staff Students Parent participation checking in: January 2019 May 2019 SLT Parents Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers Surrounding CBO's PTA Executive Board PTA SLT Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Life (CFL), New York Historical Society, Sunset Spark Robotics, NYS Coalition for Healthy School Food, Cookshop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers, Reading specialists, ENL teachers, Data specialist, Principal.  Professional development will be given to staff based on teacher’s needs and the school-wide focus. 2018-19 CEP 41   Monthly meetings for staff to collaborate in planning and curriculum development.  Monthly meetings for staff to collaborate in inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark By February 2019, we will increase parent engagement and approval by 5% as measured by ongoing Parent Survey’s provided to parents throughout the year. Time frame September 2018-February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A review of Google Drive Parent page in the area of parent involvement and attendance. Parent sign in sheets and agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) School wide assessments:  Fountas& Pinnell  NYSELAExam  Unit Assessments  Periodic Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Reading Recovery ● Small group- Reading & Writing : ● Guided Reading classroom collab. ● During School ● Writing responses ● Small group- ● After School ● At- Risk student stand alone ● Saturday School groups ● One to one- ●SETTS student classroom collab. At-Risk SETTS: groups ● One to one- ●During School ● Small group inst. stand alone ● After School  RTIReferral Proc. Mathematics School wide assessments: At- Risk SETTS Small group inst. classroom collab. ● During School  NYCPerf. Tasks  Unit Assessments  NYSMath Exam  RTIReferral Proc. ● Small group- ● After School stand alone ● Saturday School ● One to one- classroom collab. 2018-19 CEP 43  Consultation  Anecdotal  Observations  Anecdotal of Tier I interventions Follow up meetings  At-Risk/SETTS: ● Saturday School ● Small group- stand alone ●Individual- standalone ● Small group- Math Intervention   Consultation  Anecdotal  Observations  Anecdotal of Tier I interventions Follow up meetings  Science INTERGRATEDINTO ELA  RTIReferral Proc.  Consultation  Anecdotal  Observations  Anecdotal of Tier I interventions Follow up meetings  Social Studies INTERGRATEDINTO ELA ● One to one- stand alone At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  RTIReferral Proc.  Consultation  Anecdotal  Observations  Anecdotal of Tier I interventions Follow up meetings   RTIReferral Counseling : Counseling: Counseling: Proc.  Consultation  Anecdotal  Observations  Anecdotal of Tier I interventions  Prevention Group counseling  Prevention Individual counseling  Mediation ● Small group-  Youth classroom collab. programduring school ● Small group- Speech : 2018-19 CEP 44  Follow up meetings  Checklist  Screenings  Bullying stand alone During school intervention  Youth ● One to one- leadership development program classroom collab.  Youth support program ● One to one- stand alone Speech Therapy : Speech Therapy:  Group  therapy Individual therapy ● Small group- classroom collab. ● Small group- stand alone ● One to one- classroom collab. ● One to one- stand alone 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 20 students who are currently identified in our school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are planning extra curricular materials for the students to continue their learning at home throughout the school year specifically for the summer vacation months. We will continue our lunchtime Boys and Girls club coordinated by our guidance counselor to give support for STH Student academic data in the areas of reading, writing and mathematics will be gathered monthly for STH student's progress and growth. Resources from support from community organizations will be provided to parents of STH students Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Principal along with staff members assisting, will conduct the interviewing process. Candidates will submit application through open market or online through New Teacher Finder, interview and perform a demonstration lesson with students from the school community.  Assignments:  Teacher assignments will be based on licensing and certification along with expertise and experience.  Teachers will continue to implement workshops and information nights where the curriculum is presented to the parents and shown how it can be supported outside the classroom to further benefit their child’s learning.  Teachers and staff members will hold parent meetings every Tuesday afternoon along with meetings as a grade to develop ways and strategies to communicate with parents in regards to the needs and progress of all students. Support: Support of teachers will be based on the Advance Rating System along with walk through's and feedback conversations    Teachers will participate in teams for scheduled data review to analyze data and student assessments.  Conversations from initial planning conferences given at the beginning of the year will allow teachers to determine chosen professional goals to focus on. Goals will be based on previous years summative conferences.  Monday Professional Development for staff will also be used to support teachers in needed areas of instruction, environment, planning and preparation, students assessments and professional growth.  Teachers will be offered professional development in the teaching of beginning, intermediate and advanced ELL students.  Teachers will work collaboratively with ENL teachers in developing an understanding of stages of language acquisition.  Teachers will work with Literacy Coach/Reading Recovery teacher in the area of reading strategies.  Teachers will use the learning from professional development in parent workshops.  Classroom teachers and out of classroom specialists will be afforded the opportunity to attend workshops on early childhood learning and language development as well as the learning continuum for special needs students. Literacy and Math Coaches will attend reading/ mathematics workshops throughout the year and turn key information to staff during the year. Literacy and Math coaches will develop and administer professional development during Monday PD time.   2018-19 CEP 48   AIS and ENL teachers will collaborate with teachers to ensure strategies and support is given to SWD and ELL students.  Classroom teachers will continue to be given the opportunity to attend reading and math workshops throughout the year.  Teachers will attend professional development in the area of the common core standards  Teachers will also attend workshops facilitated by the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project throughout the year. Staff will continue to turn key information on a monthly basis.   Common "Sharing" periods will continue to be implemented in weekly schedule for all teachers to collaborate. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Staff will attend professional development during the year in the area of small group and guided instruction focusing on the CCSS and the Framework for Great Schools focus on rigorous instruction.  A school wide focus of Planning and Preparation/ Data collection will continue to be implemented and supported through professional development during the year.  Monday Inquiry meetings will support teachers in developing school wide strategies for ELL and SWD students.  The data review system will be implemented through teacher teams to collaborate around data analysis resulting in improved student instruction. Inter-visitation with district schools will be arranged to support teachers in developing instructional strategies.   Monday PD time will be used to support staff in instructional and planning and preparation areas.  Principal, Coaches, AIS teacher and ENL teachers will implement PD for staff as well as staff themselves turn keying any information from outside PD’s they have attended.  Webinars will be attained throughout the year to support teachers in the area of writing, building a strong social studies curriculum and improving reading amongst our ELL students and SWD students.  Principal will develop professional learning communities with a focus on planning preparation and data collection. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● The use of open house visitation for parents during the spring session ● Review of all turning 5 students through our pupil partnership team to ensure meaningful placement ● Communications with kindergarten teachers/ AIS teacher to review early intervention strategies. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Kindergarten teachers / AIS teachers will work with Pupil Partnership Team (PPT) to collaborate in developing appropriate assessments and tracking student progress. ● Teachers will work with professional development consultants with a focus on planning and preparation including assessment planning. ● Teachers will participate and implement decisions by the MOSL team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sect. 5A part 3, 4 & 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 289,758.00 X 2018-19 CEP 50  Title II, Part A Federal 0.00 N/A Title III, Part A Federal 19,534.00 X Title III, Immigrant Federal 0.00 N/A Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,576,406.00 X Sect. 5Bpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect.5Cpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Dpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Epart 3, 4 & 5 N/A Sect. 5A part 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Bpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect.5Cpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Dpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Epart 3, 4 & 5 N/A Sect. 5A part 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Bpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect.5Cpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Dpart 3, 4 & 5 Sect. 5Epart 3, 4 & 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 51  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 971, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 971, School of Math, Science and Healthy Living will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 53  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 54  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 971, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 55    convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 56   monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   2. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time;   be accountable for my learning and progress      complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: RATIONALE:According to the Spring 2016 NYSESLAT scores, we noticed that more students need specific instruction in developing literacy and language skills. This program will better prepare them to master the skills needed to be more proficient in the English language. Implications for instruction are the following: INSTRUCTIONAL PROVISIONS: ENL teachers will be providing direct instruction through a variety of ways. This will include team-teaching with ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers as well as flexible groups with ELL students. SPEAKING: - Doing phonics work - Supporting students with verbal prompts - Applying Blooms Taxonomy for language development and proficiency - Developing verb tense awareness - Providing opportunities for students to role-play - Incorporating cultural norms into lessons - Using authentic literature that includes social language - Practicing accountable talk - Creating social interaction scenarios LISTENING: - Practicing comprehending multi-part stories - Turn and talk during the read aloud - Matching picture cues to text - Providing support structures (graphic organizers) - Highlighting text features - Formulating multiple choice format-based questions related to a story or a picture - Building stamina with short read-aloud and moving on to longer texts - Having students record questions before/while/after listening to read-aloud READING: - Having students listen, write, and say beginning, middle and ending sounds - Providing a variety of multi-sensory opportunities for letters/sounds recognition - Having students read and repeat words aloud - Teaching prepositions of place and time - Elicit prior knowledge using picture walks - Doing Total Physical Response (TPR) with prepositions of place - Using images with words and providing multiple visual resources - Developing sight word vocabulary 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information WRITING: - Practicing correct sentence structures and writing techniques - Exposing students to finish product/exemplars as models - Incorporating activities with prediction - Supporting students with sentence frames - Interactive games using all four modalities - Interactive writing to improve sentence formation - Providing opportunities for oral story telling - Modeling excluding extraneous information - Modeling determining importance - Providing opportunities for practice SUBGROUPS AND GRADE LEVELS: Grade Level: Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding K 21 3 6 5 1 10 3 13 10 2 3 4 1 11 3 1 4 6 13 4 2 2 4 16 5 1 3 9 11 SCHEDULE AND DURATION: The after school program is scheduled every Friday from 2:30 PM-4:00 PM. The duration of the program is from October 20th, 2017 to May 27 th , 2018. This consist of 5 planning days for teachers and 25 total days for students. LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION: English with native language support. # AND TYPES OF CERTIFIED TEACHERS: 6 Teachers / 6 ENL certified teachers TYPES OF MATERIALS: A variety of oral language activities through games, art materials, big books which contain plays and poems to act out, listening center, books on tape, construction paper, writing paper, pencils, crayons, markers, Students' books to develop language and literacy skills. Materials will be supplemental and distinct from daily instruction. Supplemental instruction for program will be teacher made. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 CEP 60  Part C: Professional Development We understand that it is imperative for the 5 teachers mentioned to receive high quality training on how to implement the mentioned strategies to improve our ELLs' English language acquisition. Such quality trainings will be given to the 6 teachers once a month until February. The six teachers mentioned will receive training rate for their participation in “Scaffolding literacy instruction for ELLs," although other teachers are welcome to attend the PD sessions. In addition, a portion of our Tuesday extended days will be dedicated to professional development coordinated by Literacy Coach and 4 ENL teachers. Tuesday PD time will consists of learning about Co-Teaching for ELL's; Understanding the ELL environment; understanding language acquisition and language modalities; Implementing ELL learning into daily instruction. This component of PD is at no cost to program. These PD will positively impact the progress of all ELL student because it will encompass all staff that are in contact will ELL students. Teachers and administration will continue to participate in PD given through the district and uft teachers center. Agendas and attendance sheets will be given and collected. Student data will be gathered to analyze student progress and growth. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our rationale for parent activities involves focusing on our parents of ELLs, enhancing their knowledge of language acquisition and early childhood development. This will also come in the form of family services available to them in the surrounding community. This will result in supplemental guidance coming from the home in the area of language. This will also include four workshops on understanding the components of the NYSESLAT; examining technology and its use in language development along with applying it to further the learning of ELL children; Connecting the parents with surrounding community services and understanding early childhood development. Workshops will take place between November and June and be facilitated by different consultants, our ENL teachers, our guidance counselor and reading and math specialist. Parent engagement activities will also include family literacy events such as Parents as Learning Partners, PDs for parents that focus on understanding the common core implementation and its use with ELL students and core subjects. Information would communicated through the school website, backpacking notices, verbally during arrival and dismissal times along with home calls. All communication to parents will be translated into home language by school staff. Records will be kept in main office and organized by parent coordinator for surveying parent involvement. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name School of Math, Science and Healthy Livi Borough Brooklyn School Number 971 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ruth Stanislaus Coach Adalgisa Linares (Literacy) ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shelly Lekhraj Teacher/Subject Area Ora Burke Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Jessica Hellman Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal N/A Coach Hussain Abdullah (Math) School Counselor Albert Shao Parent Pei Lim Parent Coordinator Yusef Abdullah Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 345 2018-19 CEP 63 Total number of ELLs 176 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 51.01%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 971 uses the Fountas and Pinnell assessment to measure the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Fountas and Pinnell is used to measure students literacy proficiency on specific skills and to evaluate student progress. We also use CCLS aligned Benchmark and Performance Tasks to drive instruction that targets the specific needs of our ELLs. Furthermore, we use Fundations for our K-3 ELLs who require a more intensive program that provides systematic instruction in phonics, high frequency reading fluency, vocabulary, comprehension strategies, and spelling. Data on the Fountas and Pinnell assessments indicate that students need extensive vocabulary development in order tocomprehend the texts they read. As a result, to build students vocabulary, we have been previewing vocabulary beforereading and reviewing vocabulary in different contexts after reading. In addition, we make sure to expose students tovocabulary across content areas. For example, the concept of comparing and contrasting is relevant in different subject areas. When students learn how to compare and contrast characters in reading and writing, they can also take that concept andapply 2018-19 CEP 64  it in science when they compare and contrast leaves in various seasons. Moreover, in math, students take the sameconcept to compare and contrast shapes or numbers. When applying concepts in various subject areas, students have a more concrete understanding of a certain concept/vocabulary words. The data also indicates that our students need additional support in thinking critically about the texts they read. Before having students think critically about the texts they read, we make sure that they already have a basic comprehension of the text. Then we scaffold student's critical thinking with guiding questions to lead them to think about beyond what is in the text. With questioning, we begin with the first two levels in Blooms Taxonomy (knowledge and comprehension) and then slowly elevate the complexity of questions (analysis). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In addition to having four ENL teachers who provide stand alone and integrated instruction, ENL teachers attend weeklycommon sharing meetings with teachers on the grade they teach. ENL teachers also align their curriculum (T.E.A.M.Continental) with classroom units in reading, writing, math and social studies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use ENL periodic assessments, such as ELL Baseline Assessment and Fountas & Pinnell benchmark assessments. Weevaluate the success of our ENL program by measuring student progress toward English proficiency. We keep our goals in alignment with those of the State Education Department's Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives, while also keeping in mind the level of each student's native language skills. At our school, we are aware of the fact that our students that enroll with little to no native language literacy skills encounter more language obstacles than those who have previously been immersed in the language. We accept that on average, the newly enrolled students will require more time to acquire the English Language. Therefore, we continue to use ELL strategies intensively throughout the year, so that in the following year, ELLs are well-equipped to meet the AMAO targets 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessment structures in place consist of using ENL data derived from the periodic assessments and implementing small group and differentiated instruction in order to target specific needs that students may have. These procedures are scheduled as a part of our school wide assessment calendar and implemented by our ENL teachers an classroom teachers. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to provide the appropriate instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework, our school looks at the students home language, cultural and family background. This gives us insight to the student's literacy and socialdevelopment and the skills they need to work on. For example, if a Mandarin-speaking student received interrupted formal education in his/her native country, we would focus on building his/her (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) BICS first, then slowly we would transition to developing the Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Such instruction would be done in a small group setting or one-to-one to provide the necessary skills that they need to acquire BICS and CALP. We follow the RTI Model to take the 4 steps in making sure we address the needs of ELLs. Initially, we would assess students to determine whether they are meeting grade-level standards at the appropriate rate. Students are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell (reading levels), Early Childhood Assessment in Math (ECAM), letter-sound assessments (phonemic awareness) as well as end-of-unit assessments. Following the initial screening and assessment, we would provide ELLs with Tier 1 instruction such as previewing concepts and key vocabulary, including multicultural literature and activities to engage students and having students participate in Total Physical Response (TPR) to fully internalize new academic vocabulary. For students who require more intensive instruction, Tier 2 and 3 interventions would be provided in a smaller group setting or one-to-one, respectively by our AIS teachers. Lastly, we would monitor students progress to analyze how they are responding to the various interventions and make modifications as necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the RNMR data report for NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores in grades K-5, we noticed that 53.2% of newly admitted students are entering ELLs, 6.3% of them are emerging ELLs, 17.0% of them are transitioning ELLs, 10.6% are expanding ELLs 2018-19 CEP 65  and 12.%7 of the have tested out of the NYSITELL. Below is the NYSITELL data for newly admitted students: Entering: 7 (13.7%)Emerging: 12 (23.5%)Transitioning: 11 (21.5%)Expanding: 14 (27.4%)Commanding: 7 (13.7%) Below is the 2018 NYSESLAT data for grades K-5: Entering: 18 (10.2%)Emerging: 21 (11.9%)Transitioning: 48 (27.2%)Expanding: 68 (38.6%)Commanding: 26 (11.9%) After analyzing the data presented above, we noticed that 38.6% of the students were placed at the Expanding Level and 11% of the students were placed at the Commanding Level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers collaborate with the data specialists and instructional coaches to disseminate data in the beginning of the school year to adjust groups, schedules and instructional plans. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 971 implements a Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) Program. The primary goal of the program is tosupport all ELL students in achieving English language proficiency. At our school, we practice integrated ELA /ENL (co-teaching) and stand-alone models (separate location ENL services). The ENL teachers and classroom teachers collaborate by using one or more of Andrea Honigsfeld and Maria Dove (2010) Seven Co-teaching Models. When co-teaching, teachers work together to make the content and language skills more accessible to ELLs by aligning thecurriculum to both Common Core Learning Standards and NYS ENL Standards. When we provide stand alone ENL toour students, we reinforce the skills that they are learning in class and provide them additional support in areas oftheir language needs. At our school, the ELLs are placed in heterogeneous classes. There are mixed proficiency levelsin each class. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The staff of P.S. 971 makes many considerations and adjustments in order to comply with the mandated service minutes required for each language proficiency level and the needs of our ELLs. The ENL teachers provide services to all eligible students. According to CR Part 154, three hundred and sixty (360) minutes a week are to be provided to all students at the entering and emerging levels. Of the total 360 minutes, half the time(180 minutes) is allotted to integrated ELA/ENL with classroom teachers and the other half (180 minutes) is to be stand-alone ENL instruction for those at the entering stage of the program. Those at the emerging levels will receive either the same combination of types of services as those at the entering stage, or 180 minutes or 270 minutes of integrated ELA/ENL instruction and 90 minutes of stand alone ENL instruction, at the teachers discretion. Those at the Transitioning level receive 180 minutes allotted to ENL instruction in which 90 minutes are Integrated ELA/ENL instruction and the other 90 are either allotted for stand alone ENL or integrated ENL; at the teachers discretion. Those at the expanding level will be given 180 minutes of Integrated ELA/ENL instruction. For those at the commanding level, they will receive 90 minutes of integrated ELA/ENL instruction, for two years. The four full-time ENL teachers co-teach with the classroom teachers and the literacy coach during the literacy block in order to build and support 2018-19 CEP 66  language development within the curriculum. In order to meet the linguistic needs of our ELLs, as well as comply with parental choice and CR Part 154, P.S. 971 provides ENL instruction through stand alone and integrated programs. We make every attempt to group ELLs together in their classrooms in order to make push-in scheduling and servicing as efficient as possible. In the event that a Transitional Bilingual Education program is opened, students will receive 60% of their instruction in their native language and 40% of their instruction in English. As students language skills in English progress, the amount of native language instruction will decrease. In this program, beginner and intermediate students will still receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction. Advanced students will receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction. In addition, advanced students will receive 180 minutes of ELA instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Program serves as a focal point of reinforcement for ELLs and provides them with the opportunity to acquireEnglish through ENL methodologies. Teachers use various techniques and approaches taken from the balanced literacyprogram including Word Study, Guided Reading, Shared Reading, and Read Aloud. Various ENL techniques and approaches employed include Total Physical Response, Language Experience Approach, Cooperative Learning, and the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach. Materials being used to teach the ELLs include books on CD, picture dictionaries, guided reading libraries, ENL classroom libraries, texts in native languages, SmartBoard activities, Fundations program and literacy centers. In order to plan effectively, the ENL teachers at P.S. 971 meet with the classroom teachers of their students on a regular basis. This promotes continuity between ENL instruction and regular classroom instruction. Our ENL teachers provide content area support for ELLs by planning language objectives for content area lessons and make them explicit to students, emphasizing academic vocabulary development, activating and strengthening background knowledge, promoting oral interaction and extended academic talk, reviewing vocabulary and content concepts and giving students feedback on language used in class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of each year, students who are identified as ELLs and whose native language is Spanish, are given theSpanish LAB by our ENL teachers Shelly Lekhraj, Ora Burke, Salena Lin, and Denis Zhuravlev as well as our Spanish translator, literacy coach Adalgisa Linares, and paraprofessional Jennifer Cortes. Administering the Spanish LAB allows us to evaluate the student's dominant language, which will facilitate appropriate instruction for them. This is a part of our school initial intake structure. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) require special attention in order for them to succeed in our educational system. We use a number of instructional approaches to reach SIFEs depending on factors such as native language and the level of native language literacy skills. In addition to after school programs and additional academic intervention, our plan to service these students includesteaching grade level content as well as the numerous skills that SIFEs often need. Therefore, language classes will bestructured in order to address both past content objectives and current content objectives. For example, a SIFE in third grade may need instruction in order to develop literacy skills that his or her peers received in earlier grades. Additionally, a SIFE will receive the opportunity to practice these skills in an age appropriate environment. SIFEs will also be grouped together with peers in order to provide motivation, support, and language acquisition opportunities. b. Newcomer students at P.S. 971 are serviced with the intention of giving them the language skills they need to functionsuccessfully in their new country, community, and school. As is the situation with SIFEs, newcomers will also be 2018-19 CEP 67  grouped with English-speaking peers in an age appropriate environment in order to present them with language acquisition opportunities and extrinsic motivation as well as support from their peers. Since many newcomers arrive with little to no English in any of the four language skill areas and often with little to no literacy skills in their native language, our newcomers will receive ENL services that are intended to provide both content area and second language instruction. The intent is to develop both Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Literacy and language development will take place through student participation in the reading and writing workshops in their classrooms as well as further more specialized instruction from their ENL teacher. ENL teachers will work to make content area and language instruction more accessible to students by employing sheltered English content instruction as well as scaffolding techniques. Teachers will meet individual student needs through conferring and small and strategy group lessons. In addition to these supports, newcomers should also receive extra attention through after-school programs and additional academic intervention. c.To provide the best support for our developing population of ELLS, we organize curricula around themes to facilitatestudent's content knowledge and academic vocabulary. We also scaffold the content knowledge to make it more accessible to students. In addition, we will incorporate students backgrounds, cultures, native languages and experiences into our lessons. We would constantly build students confidence in being able to learn a new language (English) in order to keep them motivated and engaged so that they can be academically successful. d. We will service long-term ELLs under the belief that each student progresses at his or her own rate through the language acquisition process. However, we provide intervention to excel their language acquisition in order to promote students academic development. Furthermore, we believe any group of learners will be made up of students who are at different stages in their language acquisition and cognitive development. Following the natural order of language acquisition presented by theorists, many students will develop BICS first and CALPS second. Accordingly, our primary focus for long-term ELLs will be to develop CALPS so that students can achieve mastery of reading, writing, speaking and listening skills for application in academic content areas. In order to provide them with the extra instruction necessary for success, long-term ELLs will also receive instruction in after-school programs and in some cases individualized intervention plans. e. Former ELLs who were proficient in the English language according to the NYSESLAT receive two years of additional support. Those who will be taking the New York State ELA and Math Examinations will be provided with the appropriate testing accommodations such as time extensions, separate location, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions, oral translation for lower incidence languages and the opportunity to write responses to the open-ended questions in their native language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At P.S. 971, we have ELL students who are designated as Students With Disabilities. This population receives individualizedinstruction from their classroom teacher, paraprofessionals, and the ENL provider as prescribed by their IndividualizedEducational Program. Collaboration between teachers is essential to ensuring congruence and focused planning. In addition to this instruction, classroom teachers in grades K-2 use Wilson Fundations Program to meet the needs of students with disabilities. The Wilson Fundation is a structured phonics program that contains 10 activities that has repetition and visuals. Classroom teachers in grades 3-5 use Word Study from Reading and Writing. Both programs provide a hands-on approach (e.g., magnetic tiles matching, sorting, matching pictures to letters/words) to learning academic vocabulary and phonics which is beneficial to Students With Disabilities who are more visual and kinesthetic learners. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 971, we have ELL students who are designated as Students With Disabilities. This population receives individualizedinstruction from their classroom teacher, paraprofessionals, and the ENL provider as prescribed by their IndividualizedEducational Program. Collaboration between teachers is essential to ensuring congruence and focused planning. In addition to this instruction, students in special education are also serviced with the Wilson Fundations and Word Study program by the school’s special education teacher. The Wilson Fundtions and Word Study program provides the visuals needed to develop students vocabulary and phonics skills. This supports the students in developing their English language vocabulary which facilitates their English language acquisition. In addition, this program provides a more hands-on approach 2018-19 CEP 68  (e.g., magnetic tiles, sorting, matching pictures to letters/words) to learning phonics which is beneficial to Students With Disabilities who are more visual and kinesthetic learners. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL students are targeted for intervention in the areas of Reading, Writing and Math. The subgroups that are the focus are emerging, transitioning and expanding. Intervention is offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data gathered from our state ELA exams, NYSESLAT exam results and periodic assessments we are considering a more structured alignment of ELL instruction to the common core standards, classroom instruction and small group instruction in the classroom from ENL teachers. Starting this year, the ENL team will implement the TEAM curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All programs and services for ELLs will remain intact and continue. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Currently, we offer after school programs to all ELLs as an outlet to further interact and demonstrate language skills in arecreational and hands-on manner. One of the programs we offer is CookShop, which integrates science and cooking andallows our ELL students to discuss and talk about different types of foods. We also offer another program entitled iPadOrchestra, which integrates music and technology. Another program we offer is ENL Project Rise after school, where we use the Ballard &amp; Tighe's Carousel of IDEAS English Language Development Program in order to address the four modalities of the English language (speaking, listening, reading and writing). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use technological and literacy-based programs such as Starfall, the Wilson Fundations Word Study Program, and TEAM curriculum to match visual images to text to reinforce sight word and vocabulary building. In addition, interactive images with text allow students to build upon their language proficiency. Also, materials such as flashcards are used daily to reinforce sight word building and language usage. Other materials (i.e. sequencing games, nursery rhymes, big books, reader’s theatre, student-labeled school environment, student-created center charts, word walls, color charts, puppets, letter tiles and listening center) also provide additional learning support to our school's ELL population. Moreover, the Promethean Board, Ipads, the Smarttable and Elmo are all utilized in the classrooms to project visuals needed for language support and modeling and to also make language learning more interactive. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P.S. 971 provides native language support through the use of the Freestanding English as a Second Language program. Within this program, there is a dynamic of building native language classrooms where school staff members who speak the ELLs native language bridge the gap by allowing students to learn, express and generate content more confidently and independently. Native language support is provided by using literature in English and/or the students home language, that features the students&#39; language and cultural groups. Native language support is also provided by encouraging students to maintain and develop their first language at school, at home and in the community. Our teachers make attempts to learn about the culture of the children we teach by listening to our students and showing interest in their cultures. For example, we plan assignments that bring students’ cultures, families, languages and experiences front and center, talk with colleagues who share the students’ backgrounds and learn about their culture through books, movies and music. In addition, native language support is also provided by using the native language library in ENL classrooms, school library and in their own classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 69  At our school, required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels by carefully designing units based on the needs of our ELLs at their appropriate level. We follow World-Class Instructional Design and Assessments and New York State Bilingual Common Core Initative to guide classroom instructions. Resources such as the Fundations program and Internet literacy-based programs such as Starfall and BrainPop support ELLs English language development. To enhance their learning, we also use supplemental materials such as flashcards, games, nursery rhymes, big books, readers theatre, color charts, puppets, letter tiles, and interactive images with text. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to welcome newly arrives ELLs, we establish classroom routines and norms. The school counselor provides a tour for new students and parents to acclimate them to the new environment. New students participate in a welcome lunch group every week to foster peer relationships. Some classroom teachers who are bilingual are able to speak to students in their native language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, P.S. 971 does not offer electives to the ELL population. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? As of now, the Dual Language program is not available at our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development will be given by our Literacy Coach on the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. This system will be used for assessing reading levels of all ELLs. The performance task in the area of mathematics will be given to measure student learning. Norming and professional development will be given to teachers by our Math Coach. In addition, consultants from Teacher's College provide coaching to all teachers, including ENL teachers, targeting areas of instruction pertaining to Reading and Writing Workshop. Classroom and ENL teachers at the school attend professional development workshops given by the Office of English Language Learners and the Brooklyn South Field Support Center. One set of workshops in particular is Just Words, which is a highly explicit multi-sensory decoding and spelling program. Another professional development opportunity is Reading With Power and Passion: Planning for Small Group Strategy Lessons During Independent Reading. This looks at specific reading comprehensions strategies to teach small groups. A third opportunity is The Magic of Explicit Instruction, and this will discuss practices of explicit instruction while exploring the strength of clear lesson purposes. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 70  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 15% of the total hours will be allotted to all teachers in ELL-specific professional development, and 50% of total PD hours will be allotted to ENL teachers in ELL-specific professional development. These PD's will provide teachers with focuses on ELL information that includes, but is not limited to: - Understanding the system of the NYSESLAT and how to implement strategies into daily curriculum- Developing a word study program that focuses on oral communication and language development- Making instruction effective and connecting language development to daily instruction - Understanding cultural differences within our Asian, Latino and Middle-Eastern population and surrounding community Professional development hours in ELL training as per CR Part 154.2 are tracked online on our current record-keeping system, Google Docs. Staff also write a brief description, and occasionally turnkey what they have learned during a school wide PD on information they have leaned from the ELL PD's they have attended. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At our school, we understand the importance of parental involvement, especially with parents of our ELLs. We ensure to communicate to parents that they can communicate with us about any ELL related matter at anytime, through multiple outlets to schedule an appointment with us, including email, phone, walk-ins etc. Ideally, we would provide these annual meetings with parents of ELLs during the Parent Connect time, which are during our after school hours but in the events that parents cannot meet during this time, our ENL teachers will meet with them during preps, lunches, prior to school hours, etc. Translators are provided during these meetings to accommodate parents' language needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in our school is seamless. We invite parents into our classrooms monthly via Parents as Learning Partners. We have monthly PTA meetings that alternate to accommodate parents' schedules. Translators are provided during these meetings to accommodate parents' language needs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. PART V-10. The school community is centered on creating an environment that allows all learners to flourish. Teachers,paraprofessionals and school aides who speak the ELL population’s native language provide additional support when needed throughout each school day. In addition, other interventions such as Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Reading Recovery are provided where strategies in small group work and increasing intensive instruction in area of need are critical. These strategies are applied to reinforce and provide optimal reinforcement for ELL advancement. In addition, careful evaluation of NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data results helps align the instructional measures to ensure that the ELL population receives adequate interventions in not just the ELA content area, but also, integrated throughout instruction in math, science and social studies. PART V- 11. Our current program has resulted in the improvement of our ELLs. We measure this progress by NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science State exams data. For social studies, we use teacher created assessments and end-of-unit assessments to track progress. Furthermore, in all subjects, the use of formal and informal assessments are in place to be reviewed on monthly basis. All teachers are aware of all the ELLs in their class and provide the necessary accommodations to meet the ELLs needs. Most students have made progress in their English language proficiency level. From formal and informal assessments, we noticed that our beginner students need extensive BICS development. As a result, we designed a curriculum to help build this 2018-19 CEP 71  type of language.For example, to improve their BICS development, we use visuals, gestures, facial expressions as well as encouraging them to have more face-to-face interactions. In addition, we also model appropriate language use to comprehend and produce social language and vocabulary. PART V-12. This year for the Title III after school program, we will be providing NYSESLAT Test prep for all our ELLs who will be testing. The program encompasses four levels of English language acquisition: entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding. It incorporates academic content and vocabulary and differentiates instruction based on language level to meet the needs of ELLs. PART V-13- All programs and services for ELLs will remain intact and continue. PART V- 14- Currently, we offer after school programs to all ELLs as an outlet to further interact and demonstrate language skills in a recreational and hands-on manner. One of the programs we offer is CookShop, which integrates science and cooking by studying the chemistry in different types of foods. We also offer another program entitled iPad Orchestra, which integrates music and technology. Another program we offer is ENL after school, where we use the Ballard & Tighe Carousel of IDEAS English Language Development Program in order to address the four modalities of the English language (speaking, listening, reading and writing). PART V- 15- We use technological and literacy-based programs such as Starfall and Fundations to match visual images to text to reinforce sight word and vocabulary building. In addition, interactive images with text allow students to build upon their language proficiency. Also, materials such as flashcards are used daily to reinforce sight word building and language usage. Other materials (i.e. sequencing games, nursery rhymes, big books, reader’s theatre, student-labeled school environment, student-created center charts, word walls, color charts, puppets, letter tiles and listening center) also provide additional learning support to our school's ELL population. Moreover, the Promethean Board is utilized in the classrooms to project visuals needed for language support and modeling and to also make language learning more interactive. PART V- 16- P.S. 971 provides native language support through the use of the Freestanding English as a Second Language program. Within this program, there is a dynamic of building native language classrooms where school staff members who speak the ELLs native language bridge the gap by allowing students to learn, express and generate content more confidently and independently. Native language support is provided by using literature in English and/or the student's home language, that features the student's language and cultural groups. Native language support is also provided by encouraging students to maintain and develop their first language at school, at home and in the community. Our teachers make attempts to learn about the culture of the children we teach by listening to our students and showing interest in their cultures. For example, we plan assignments that bring students’ cultures, families, languages and experiences front and center, talk with colleagues who share the students’ backgrounds and learn about their culture through books, movies and music. In addition, native language support is also provided by using the nativelanguage library in ENL classrooms, school library and in their own classrooms. PART V- 17- At our school, required services support and resources correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels by carefully designing units based on the needs of our ELLs at their appropriate level. We follow New York State Bilingual Common Core Learning Standards. Resources such as the Fundations program and internet literacy-based programs such as Starfall and BrainPop support ELLs English language development. To enhance their learning, we also use supplemental materials such as flashcards, games, nursery rhymes, big books, reader's theatre, color charts, puppets, letter tiles, and interactive images with text. PART V- 18- At the beginning of the school year, we offer a parent open house to inform parents about what their child will be learning and how the school day will be structured throughout the year. In addition, we have a newcomers packet with key vocabulary and phrases in English and in their home language, home activities, a map of the school, bilingual books for parents to read to their children and how to seek outside resources to support their child's learning. PART V- 19- At this time, P.S. 971 does not offer electives to the ELL population. PART V- 20- As of now, the Dual Language program is not available at our school. 2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ruth Stanislaus, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School of Math, Science and He School DBN: 20K971 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ruth Stanislaus Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Yusef Abdullah Parent Coordinator Shelly Lekhraj ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Adalgisa Linares Hussain Abdullah Coach Coach Albert Shao School Counselor Karina Costantino N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 2018-19 CEP 74 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: School of Math, Science & Healthy Superintendent: Karina Costantino DBN: 20K971 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yusef Abdullah Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess translations consist of: - Home Language Identification Survey - Teacher family information packets survey - Blue cards - ELL enrollment of students 2018-19 CEP 75  - Examining the levels of students on 2017-2018 NYSESLAT scores that may reflect the level of English spoken in the home - ATS report (RHLA) 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Spanish Arabic Russian n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Mandarin, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Handbook September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides. Translations are also provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking classroom teachers. In 2018-19 CEP 76  Orientation Packets Daily notices in regards to school functions September On-going addition, we also have PTA co-presidents one Spanish and one Mandarin speaking who will translate during parent meetings. Notices and family communications are provided in four languages: Spanish, English, Mandarin and Arabic. Moreover, the school website can also be translated in Mandarin, Spanish and Arabic and are distributed to families. Same as above Same as above Parent Teacher Conferences September / November / March / May Same as above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 1. Parent Teacher Conferences September/ November/ March/ May 2. Tuesdays Parent Connect Time- Ongoing throughout the year 3. Parent Orientation Meetings- Ongoing throughout the year 4. Parent Orientation Meetings with ELL Parents- once a year for every ELL parent interpretation service(s)?  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides. 2018-19 CEP 77  5. Parent Workshops during school year At least four times per year 6. Curriculum Night Once in September 7. Parents as learning partners Alternate months 8. Learning Expo Once in May  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides.  Translations services are provided by our bilingual Spanish or Mandarin-speaking paraprofessionals and school aides. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use the "Remind App" where a large majority of families have signed up. In addition, we use Mandarin and Spanish speaking staff to call parents Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are given a binder with Chancellors regulations at the beginning of each school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 78   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will place a copy of the Chancellor's regulation A-663 in the main office for the use of parents who wish to read the translation policy. We also send home all brochures and notifications in English, Mandarin and Spanish via student backpack. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Besides our school environmental survey, via our school website, we have parent surveys that allow parents to give feedback to us in regards to services we have for them. During PTA meetings, parent conferences, social functions and parent visitation days, notices are given to parents notifying them of all services in our school. Surveys are occasionally sent home to parents after specific workshops, meetings and events for feedback. The school also utilizes the Remind App to communicate with parents and receive any concerns and ideas that they may have.] 2018-19 CEP 79 
