2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M001 School Name: P.S. 001 ALFRED E. SMITH Principal: AMY HOM 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 1 Alfred E Smith 310200010001 PK-5 th 8 Henry Street 212-267-4133 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M001 212-267-4469 Fax: Amy Hom ahom@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Email Address: Amy Hom Seung Lee Yu YanHuang Christine Wong Rosa Rodriguez n/a n/a Tracey Wong District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue New York, NY 10001 Room 713 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-3702 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amy Hom Seung Lee Yu YanHuang N/A N/A Tracey Wong Sandra Simplice Christine Wong *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Rosa Rodriguez XiuYanLin Chun Hua Pan Yu Dan Chen N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/PTA Vice President Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to foster the growth of each student so that each may benefit from their multi-cultural community today, and contribute to their multifaceted world tomorrow. P.S 1 is a community dedicated to the job of learning, the excitement of discovery and the sharing of knowledge. We will do this in the following ways: ● Expanding the children’s awareness of their world; 2018-19 CEP 9  ● Fostering the growth of our community of life long learns. ● Increasing the children’s oral and written language and communication skills; ● Integrating all curriculum areas to enhance and support the learning opportunities for our English Language Learners, Special Education and High Achieving children. ● Developing the children’s critical thinking skills; ● Creating rigorous learning environments and opportunities for all children to meet high standards. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Alfred E. Smith Elementary Public School 1 is located in Community District 2 in the heart of Chinatown. The total student population from Pre-Kindergarten to grade 5 is currently 331 students. Our special education programs consists of the following: Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT), resource room (SETSS), and self-contained (12:1:1) class for grades 1-3. We have a Dual Language English-Mandarin Program at the PreK, kindergarten, first, second, and third grade levels. There is one Dual Language kindergarten classes, one in first grade, and one in second grade. In 2018-2019, the program will include one fourth grade dual language class. The student ethnic composition consists of 51.35% Asian and others that include Pacific Islanders, Alaskan Natives and Native American’s, 27.19% Hispanic, 18.73% African American, and 1.81% white, and 0.6% as multi-racial. 51.66% are males and 48.33% are females. The school’s average daily attendance is 94.29%. The school is a Title I School wide Program. Since the fall of 2013, P.S. 1 has been a member of the New York City Community Learning Schools Initiative (NYCCLSI) and is in partnership with the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) to provide much needed services and materials for students and their families. The CLS Resource Coordinator is a full-time staff member who outreaches and coordinates programs for our students and their families. As a Community Learning School, P.S. 1 has been able to provide funds for class learning programs such as classroom workshops from the New York Historical Society and Visual Thinking Strategies so that the 4th grade students can better understand American colonial times and the American Revolution. In addition, P.S. 1 has been able to take advantage of a Klein grant award to fund enrichment programs such as National Dance Institute, Young People's Chorus, and Brickz4Kids. To support students’ healthy development, the school partners with New York City Football Club (NYCFC) and New York Road Runners so that students can learn how to maintain a healthy and active lifestyle throughout the year by engaging in physical activity and making healthy food choices, such as during breakfast and snack time. For the third year, PS 1 has a full-time in-school bilingual social worker to address the socio-emotional needs of students and their family members. The vision is to provide immediate and coordinated resources and outreaches to meet the needs of the families so that students can come to school healthy and ready to learn. This past year, PS 1 implemented the second year of the New York City Department of Education ARTS grant for ELL and SWD students. In partnership with American Ballet Theatre, students in Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, and 1st grade participated in weekly dance lessons that focused on retelling the book through dance. Each grade culminated the program with a family engagement activity. P.S. 1 uses the Title III program funds to provide programs that support the language development of the school’s significant population of English Language Learners through a myriad of enrichment and learning activities. It is the school’s belief that students learn not only content but also higher level vocabulary from enrichment programs. The funds are used for after school programs such as soccer (through the New York City Football Club), Young People’s Chorus, and a baking class called Cake and Bake. The school is a Title 1 school-wide project school with the Universal Free Lunch Program (100% free lunch). 2018-19 CEP 10  The school is continually forming networks of community partnerships to support growth in student learning. P.S. 1 has an established 19 year partnership with Apex for Youth. Every year, Apex recruits volunteers to staff various Saturday morning programs. There are 4th and 5th grade ELA and Math test prep programs and a 3rd grade ELA program. In the past few years, Apex has also developed a robust basketball program for fourth and fifth graders. This past year, Apex started a mentoring program for 4th and 5th grade students to begin to develop public speaking skills and social development with peers. Furthermore, through the Reading Empowers Program, their volunteers work with students in grades first to third grade in developing their literacy learning through read aloud and book activities. Apex also has programming for students who are no longer elementary school age. Programs include mentorship and SAT test prep. Every Saturday, the building is utilized for students and learning. Another enduring partnership has been with the Read Ahead program. The program welcomes volunteers to come to the school weekly to read to individual students in grades 1-5. It fosters a relationship between the adult volunteer and the student in which they can share a lunch and read a book together. The program services approximately 50 students. The following is PS 1's vision and mission statement: Our mission is to foster the growth of each student so that each may benefit from their multi-cultural community today, and contribute to their multifaceted world tomorrow. PS 1 is a community dedicated to the job of learning, the excitement of discovery and the sharing of knowledge. We will do this in the following ways:  Expanding the children's awareness of their world;    Fostering the growth of our community of life long learners; Increasing the children's oral and written language and communication skills; Integrating all curriculum areas to enhance and support the learning opportunities for our English Language Learners, Special Education and High Achieving children;  Developing the children's critical thinking skills;  Creating rigorous learning environments and opportunities for all children to meet high standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Of our student population, 26% are English Language Learners and are provided with English language development through our Mandarin Dual Language program and stand alone ESL program. Of our student population, 31% are classified as students with special needs with students receiving related services (speech, OT, PT, counseling, and Adapted PE), ICT program, SETSS, or lower 12:1:1 class (kindergarten to 2nd grade). 1.2 % of our school population is in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This year, PS 1 continues to strive to develop strong family and community ties. We understand that students' learning can be reinforced and further developed when there is strong family understanding and support. This year PS 1 strategically held programs in which parents learn about healthy eating and cooking. This year, the Parent Coordinator and a school aide lead monthly Cookshop program for parents. Approximately 25 parents participated and learned about healthy eating. During one of our Family Nights, parents were engaged in classroom math activities to encourage discussion with their children. They were then encouraged to use these activities at home. In 5th grade, the partnership with Spoons Across America supported students in planning for a dinner party across several classroom lessons. The dinner party planning also related to the grade's literacy and social studies units of study. The resulting dinner was a time for family gathering around picnic foods that was prepared by the students and adult volunteers. 2018-19 CEP 11  An area of focus this year will be the element of rigorous instruction, particularly in using data driven instruction protocols to develop lesson and unit plans. With the teacher inquiry teams already in place, PS 1 will be deepening the work by looking at writing and math pre and post assessments. The teams will then use the data to prioritize the learning goals. Furthermore, the data will be used to plan lessons and units to meet all learners through whole class or small group instruction. The teams will work together to strategically break down the learning into manageable student steps as well as create independent work tools for students. There will be a particular focus on students in full-time special education classes. The teams will also look at the vocabulary of the content and also their instruction to ensure that it is clear and a high level. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M001 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 318 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 75.5% % Reduced Lunch 20.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 25.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 94.1% 0.9% 25.5% 17.6% 53.5% 1.3% 0 0% 5.5 54.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School’s Strength: The school leader ensures that all teachers collaborate in professional teams where they develop and implement school-wide instructional practices embedding the CCLS and instructional shifts to continuously promote improved achievement for all learners. (Quality Review, 1.1, 2016) The use of staff time is structured so that teachers meet regularly throughout the week to plan and refine units of students to emphasize work for all students, including ENLs and SWDs. School leaders use resources and make organizational decisions to promote student learning. ( Principal Performance Observational QR Indicator 1.1, 2017) 2. School’s Needs: Teachers will develop pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Frame work for Teaching, aligned to curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. (Quality Review Report 1.1, 2016) 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers will align assessments to curricular, use ongoing assessments and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. ( Quality Review Report 2.2, 2016) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS-aligned lesson plans to provide rigorous instruction that includes student learning needs by using a rubric and data driven protocols aligned to CCLS, as measured by the data analysis collection that shows at least one level of growth from the pre assessments to the post assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will work with the staff developers to develop, implement, and review the data instruction protocol and rubrics for grade teams to collect data and information, with a specific focus on ENL students and SWDs during vertical team meetings. Staff members and administrators will conference as a grade team or vertically across grades to reflect on student progress. Administrators will provide actionable feedback to teachers and grade teams to monitor engagement and access for all students in ELA and Math. Administrators and teachers will meet to share and discuss updated information on the CCLS in both ELA and Math during grade curriculum meetings. Administrators and grade teams will attend workshops and district-wide PLCs to address the needs of SWDs and ENL students in ELA and Math. Teachers will turnkey the information to other teachers during designated PD time. Administrators, grade teams, and school Committees (SLT, PD Committee) will plan and implement workshops and meetings for parents during Parent Engagement time, PTA meetings, and Back to School/Family Night meeting times around the ELA and Math curriculum and the alignment to CCLS. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, staff developers/coaches Teacher teams, school leaders, staff developer, coaches, students Teachers teams, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams school leaders Teachers teams, school leaders, teachers, students school leaders, coaches, staff developer, teachers, students, parents 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018-June 2019, teacher teams will plan and schedule family workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time that focuses on the current unit of study and the instructional alignment to CCLS. Families will learn strategies to support and encourage more discussion with their child in both literacy and math. From September 2018-June 2019, grade teams will develop and send home curriculum goals and expectations for Reading and Writing units. In May 2019, teachers will plan a school-wide Family Night in May to showcase math instruction with across all grades. From September 2018-June 2019, Parent coordinator, PTA, and School Committees will schedule parent workshops following PTA meetings to inform families about curriculum and instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers and the implementation of curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards. We will use tax levy and Title I funds to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional time used for planning across two grade levels or grade bands (grades K-2 or grades 3-5). We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers and the implementation curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards. We will use tax levy and Title I funds to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional two full days for grade planning across grades in February and May. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and to provide individual teachers opportunities to attend one day or series of days for specific workshops. We have aligned our tax levy and resources for staff developers to provide school-wide workshops for teachers and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  By February 2019, administration will meet with teacher teams to review mid-year CCLS-aligned lesson plans to ensure rigorous instruction, as measured by the data analysis collection of pre assessments and post assessments for each unit of study that shows at least one level of growth, running records, and/or math benchmark levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will include end of the unit benchmarks from Math Investigations, reading and writing continuum from Teacher's College curriculum, and/or running record levels. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. School’s Strengths: School administration has established a positive, inclusive learning environment and coordinates supports for social and emotional development as well as opportunities for enrichment. Students are known well by their teachers and administrators which results in a nurturing school culture. (Quality Review Report 1.4, 2016; NYC Quality Guide, 2017) The school establishes a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families and provide support to achieve those expectations. ( Quality Review 3.4, 2016) To create a supportive environment, 89% of teachers reported that there is peer support for academic work. (School Quality Snapshot, 2017) 2. School’s Needs: Administration, teachers, and all school stakeholders will continue to work together to assess the school’s needs through data collection and responding by providing the appropriate social and emotional supports. (Quality Review Report 1.1, 2016) 2018-19 CEP 19  School administration, staff developers and teachers will continue to work on differentiation and small group instruction across all grades and classrooms to support student learning. (Principal Performance Observations, QR indicators 1.2, 2.2, 2017) 3. Policies, practices and structures Our full-time bilingual social worker and a school-based guidance counselor have created various student social-emotional learning groups throughout the school day to support student individual needs. For example, we have created a Girls' Group to focus on empowering our female students in the upper grades as well as a Circle of Friends group that supports new students to the school. There is also a Lunch Bunch group that supports students with maintaining friendships with their same-aged peers. Teachers are aware of all additional academic, athletic, and/or art based programs so that they could encourage students to join an extra curricular either after school or on Saturday to support and continue their interests. Updates about our programs and structures are shared at our monthly SLT and PTA meetings with parents. Our School Assessment Team/Pupil Personnel Team (SAT/PPT) meet once a month to offer time to discuss with teachers any academic and social/emotional support for the classroom or recommendations from the school level to support the whole child. Our social worker, guidance counselor, Parent Coordinator, and administrator will meet to plan 2-3 parent workshops during the school year to support parents with a child's emotional-social learning at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in the lowest 1/3 subgroup will increase their scores from Level 1 or 2 to either Level 3 or 4 as measured by the NYS ELA and Math assessments resulting in a 2% increase in achieving proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SBST, PPT, administration, and teachers will create a schedule of meetings to identify, discuss, reflect, and implement intervention and services for students in the lowest 1/3 subgroup. Students, teachers, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, SBST, UFT Resource Coordinator The school guidance counselor, School Based Support Team, and teachers will schedule additional meeting times on the scheduled Tuesday Parent Engagement time or during the school day to meet with students and families and provide social emotional and academic updates. School leaders and teachers will create a schedule of networking meetings with community organizations such as Charles B. Wang Community Health Center, the Go Project, and APEX. Students identified with a need for additional mental health services will receive support through the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Mental Health Services Pilot program. Administrators, school staff, and Parent Coordinator will schedule additional meeting times and workshops for parents of at-risk students to meet with classroom teachers and staff to discuss academic, social, and emotional progress during the school day and Tuesday Parent Engagement time. Administrators will conference and meet with specialists from the BFSC for information on additional Professional Development and trainings. school leaders, School Based Support Team (SBST), UFT Resource Coordinator Teachers, school leaders, SBST, guidance counselor, parents, Parent Coordinator, students Teachers, staff, school leaders, staff developers, coaches, Parent Coordinator, parents, students school leaders, BFSC specialists, teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, guidance counselor, School Based Support Team (SBST), teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators. teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, BFSC specialist, teachers 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018-June 2019, teacher teams will plan and schedule family workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to inform families about our community partnerships and support services available at the school. From September 2018-June 2019, the School Implementation Team will schedule about 2-3 meetings during the school year to support families about the IEP process, classifications, and learning needs of students. In September 2018, teachers will plan a back to school night in September to share information about the school and partnerships that are available to support student academic learning and social-emotional development. From September 2018-June 2019, School Committees, PTA, and Parent Coordinator will schedule parent workshops following PTA meetings to share information about community partnerships and school supports that can assist families with the academic and social-emotional needs of students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and to provide individual teachers opportunities to attend one day or series of days for specific workshops. We have aligned our tax levy and resources for staff developers to provide school-wide workshops for teachers and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in the lowest 1/3 subgroup will continue to make academic progress in ELA and Math as evidenced by interim assessments in September, November, and January by increasing their reading levels by 2-3 levels as identified by reading records and by formal and informal teacher observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  Teachers College Assessment Pro reading records and predictive assessments (upper grades) are instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School’s Strengths: The school leader has established differentiated teacher support based on analysis of student and teacher data/work products which reflect varied student experiences as the monitoring of progress through assessments. (Quality Review Report 1.1, 2016) All teachers collaborate in professional teams where they develop and implement school-wide instructional practices. (School Quality Guide, 2017) The school leader ensures that curriculum is engaging, coherent and aligned to CCLS and promotes college and career readiness. ( Principal Performance Observation, QR Indicator 1.1, 2018) 87% of teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn and that teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs. (School Quality Snapshot, 2017) 2. School’s Needs: Teachers need to deepen skills in using formative and summative assessments to analyze information on student learning outcomes to effectively make unit plans and lesson adjustments that is appropriately aligned to CCLS and has multiple access for all students. (Quality Review Report 5.1, 2016) Teachers need to provide students with opportunities to revise and enrich their writing independently. Teachers need to review 2018-19 CEP 24  writing units to include writing strategies that are appropriately taught throughout the writing process. ( Principal Performance Observation, QR indicator 1.2, 2018) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will work collaboratively in their grade teams to provide CCLS aligned instruction and include access for ENL students and SWDs, as measured by interim assessments including data from TC Pro, MOSL evaluations, and JIR 2018 (June Instructional Report) in the development and revisions of weekly lesson plans and/or unit plans. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, school leaders, and staff developers will create workshops and PD for all grade teams to review and adjust the aligned CCLS curriculum, such as math. Teachers, school leaders, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators. Teachers Administrators will meet with grade teams during monthly meetings to monitor and provide actionable feedback to teachers to monitor engagement of all students by reviewing lessons and unit plans to ensure alignment to CCLS and access for ENL students and SWDs. Teachers will meet in weekly grade meetings to collaborate to norm and review student data gathered from pre and post assessments and create independent work tools to support students in becoming independent and to make their thinking public. Teachers will revise and create rigorous unit assessments.make it more rigorous and aligned to CCLS. Teacher teams, students, school leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams Every 4-6 weeks, teacher grade teams will meet across grades (above and below) to share data analysis, lesson planning and assessments. The SIT committee will create a schedule and meet with teachers, ICT teams and grade teams to discuss, review, and implement IEP goals that are aligned to CCLS. Teachers will meet every 8-10 weeks in team band (PK-2 and 3-5) meetings or whole school meetings to vertically review student data gathered from assessments, norming , and review the CCLS alignment across grades for access for ENL students and SWDs. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams, SIT Committee Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administrators, teacher teams Teacher teams, students, school leaders SIT Committee Teacher teams, students school leaders 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018 and May 2019, teacher grade teams will meet with families during the school-wide Back to School Night and Family Night to share academic expectations and support services available as a grade team. From September 2018 to June 2019, teacher teams will plan and schedule family workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time that focuses on the current unit of study and the instructional alignment to CCLS. Families will learn strategies to support their child in literacy and math. From September 2018 to June 2019, each grade will develop and send home curriculum goals and expectations for Reading and Writing units. From September 2018 to JUne 2019, grades will send home newsletters highlighting the current unit of study in reading, writing, and math as well and upcoming events in the class and school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers and the implementation of curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards. We will use tax levy and Title I funds to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional time used for planning across two grade levels or grade bands (grades K-2 or grades 3-5). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 all teachers will collaboratively meet with their grade teams to review aligned instruction with the CCLS and include access for ENL students and SWDs, as measured by analyzing the reading record data from TC Pro from October and January, specific related IEP Goals, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, student's pre and post assessments and revisions made to lesson and unit plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress include pre and post unit assessments, informal observations, and lesson and unit plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School’s Strengths: The Principal communicates high expectations through a cohesive communication structure that includes the following: emails, weekly FYI notices, daily updates, grade and individual conferences, and professional development. (Quality Review Report 1.4, 3.4, 2016; School Quality Snapshot, 2017) The Principal has established differentiated teacher support based on an analysis of student and teacher data/work products (Quality Review Report 1.2, 2016) 98% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. (School Quality Snapshot, 2017) 2. School’s Needs: School leaders will continue to work with teachers to provide high quality supports and extensions into the curricula so that all learners, specifically English Language Learners, are engaged through appropriate entry points. (Quality Review Report 2.2, 2016; School Quality Snapshot, 2017) School leaders will continue to support teachers by offering opportunities for professional learning in questioning, discussion and mentoring for new teachers. (Quality Review Report 4.2, 2016) Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders, including teacher leaders, will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to create lessons that are aligned with the CCLS for ENLs, resulting in a 3% percentage increase in achieving proficiency in the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). 2018-19 CEP 29 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? school leaders, teachers, parents, students school leaders, teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, parents, School Based Support Team (SBST), staff developers/coaches Administrators, teachers, SBST, staff developers/coaches Administrators, teachers, ELL consultants, staff developers/coaches Administrators, teachers, staff developers/coaches Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators, teachers, and parents will continue to meet during monthly SLT meetings to discuss ELL student data, progress and interventions. Administrators and teachers will meet as a Professional Development Committee to plan and implement cycles of professional development for ELL’s during the weekly Monday Professional Development allotted time. Selected ELL teachers will attend action research meetings with ELL consultants and staff developers and in return will turnkey the information during designated Monday Professional Development time. Teachers, ELL consultants, staff developers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams and staff developers will meet to analyze ELL student data and create lessons and activities that engage students in high quality discussions to enhance strengthening, listening, and speaking skills. Teachers, staff developers, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 to June 2019, administrators, teachers and parents will meet together during monthly SLT meetings to discuss instruction, curriculum, student data and interventions. From September 2018 to June 2019, administration and teacher teams will plan and schedule family workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time that focuses on the current unit of study and the instructional alignment to CCLS from September 2018-June 2019. Families will learn about school-wide expectations. 2018-19 CEP 30  From September 2018 to June 2019, administration, teacher teams, and parent coordinator will schedule workshops that parents can attend to learn more about curriculum and instruction, such as Teachers College workshops for parents. In September 2018 and May 2019, administration, teacher teams, and staff will plan a school-wide Back to School Night and Family Night in May to showcase student instruction and school expectations. From September 2018 to June 2019, Parent coordinator and school Committees will meet with the PTA to plan workshops and meetings for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers and the implementation of ELL curricula aligned to the Common Core Standards. We will use tax levy and Title I funds to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional time used for planning across grades. We have aligned our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and to provide individual teachers opportunities to attend one day or series of days for specific workshops. We have aligned our tax levy and resources for staff developers to provide school-wide workshops for teachers and administrators. We have aligned our Title III budget and resources to support the purchase of ELL materials and implementation of curriculum in classrooms. We have used our resources to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional time used for teacher teams to plan and to review assessments and data. We have aligned our Title III resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and teacher teams to provide teachers with the opportunities to attend one day or a series of days for specific workshops, ie technology training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders, including teacher leaders and staff developers will revise and implement a professional development plan that will support and build teachers' capacity to revise their lessons and plans to align to the CCLS for ENLs as evidenced by teachers' use of a school wide student work protocol and planning template as well as reading record data from TC Pro from October /January and NYSESLAT scores. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used will include running records, sampling students work, complete and analysis of student work protocols, and attendance at workshops and meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School’s Strengths: PS 1 is able to communicate data, high expectations for student achievement, and establish an inclusive learning environment all students, teachers, and families. (Quality Review Report 1.4, 3.4, 2016) 98% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn (School Quality Snapshot, 2017) 100% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (School Quality Guide, 2017) We have completed 4 years as a UFT Community Learning School to provide services and materials for students, families, and community. PS 1 promotes an open door policy for families as well as community stakeholders. PS 1 has many partnerships with community agencies, such as Apex for Youth, American Ballet Theatre, and Cookshop that promotes and provides services to foster the academic, social and emotional development of children. 2018-19 CEP 33  Parent leaders are an important part of the school culture and ensure that the community is embedded within school practices. Newsletters in various languages that highlight extensive offerings at the school, including academic and artistic celebrations as well as curriculum high points, are sent home. 2. School’s Needs: PS 1 will continue to identify the target groups and collect data that demonstrates a need for additional support services to enhance their academic, social and emotional development to support student success. (Quality Review Report 1.4, 3.4, 2016) P.S 1 will continue to outreach to parents to increase school involvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders, teacher leaders, and community leaders will create a Committee that will review and address students and families who would benefit from additional academic, emotional, or health by implementing a support plan resulting in increased student achievement as evidenced by student report cards and observations for 5% of our families. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers, parents, administration, and staff will meet weekly during Tuesday designated Parent Engagement time to conference with parents and community members about the programs used to provide academic, health, and emotional progress of students. Teachers, staff, parents, UFT CLS Resource Coordinator and administration will have monthly UFT Community Learning Schools board meetings and School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings to reflect on programs, assess current needs of students and implementing current or new programs to address the academic, emotional, and social needs of all students. Teachers, staff members, UFT CLS Resource Coordinator, administrators, Parent Coordinator, and parents will continue to hold and attend monthly PTA meetings to discuss, plan, and implement the needs of the community. Weekly Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) will meet with teachers, service providers, and administration to identify at-risk students in grades K-5, monitor and implement academic, health, and social services for students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, parents, staff members, administrators, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, students, parents, staff members, administrators, UFT, Parent Coordinator, SLT Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, parents, staff members, administrators, UFT, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, School Based Support Team (SBST) administrators, service providers, Parent Coordinator, PPT Students, families, community members Teachers, students, staff, parents, students, school leaders, UFT CLS, SLT Teachers, staff, parents, Parent Coordinator, PTA, school leaders, UFT CLS Teachers, School Based Support Team (SBST), service providers, school leaders, students, PPT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  -Apex for Youth -New York City Community Learning Schools Initiative (NYCCLSI) -Parent ESL Conversation Classes with International Center -American Ballet Theatre -Spoons Across America Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our tax levy and Title I resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and staff and to provide individual teachers and staff opportunities to attend one day or series of days for specific workshops for families. Families attend Teacher’s College Reading and Writing workshops which are aligned to the CCLS with a school staff member who provides translations and comprehension support. We will use our tax levy and resources for staff developers to provide school-wide workshops for teachers and administrators. We will use used our resources to hire per diem substitute teachers to support additional time used for teacher teams to plan and to review assessments and data. We will use our Title III resources to support staff developers to work with individual teachers and teacher teams to provide teachers with the opportunities to attend one day or a series of days for a specific workshop with families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders, teacher leaders, and community leaders will review agenda items from Committee meetings to ensure that students and families' needs are being addressed and benefiting from the additional academic, emotional, or health services. The committee will review the support plan which will include student attendance to ensure services increase student achievement as evidenced by interim academic assessments, from informal and formal observations from staff and service providers, and the decrease levels of infractions and occurrences documented on incidence reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used include attendance sheets, informal and formal observational notes made by staff, and completed needs surveys from staff and parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Data from Framework for Great Schools, and Instructional Reports, identification of lowest 1/3 subgroups, teacher observations and assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Literacy intervention 1:1 /small groups During school day Small groups During school day At-risk resource room Reading Recovery intervention 1:1/ small groups 1:1 /small groups America Reads tutors 1:1 /small groups Learning Leaders 1:1 Everybody Wins 1:1 /small groups Title III Programs and Activities Reading Empowers Grades 1-3 Grade 4 APEX ELA Academy Small groups Small groups Small groups Small groups During school day/ extended day During school day/ extended day During school day/ extended day During school day Afterschool Afterschool Saturdays Saturdays Afterschool Grade 3 ELA Academy Grade 2 NYSESLAT Prep (beginners and intermediates) Grade 4 &5 APEX Math Academy Mathematics Data from Framework for Great Schools, and Instructional Reports,identification of lowest 1/3 subgroups, teacher 1:1/small groups After school tutoring Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 37  Science Social Studies observations and assessments Data from School Quality Guide, Identification of lowest 1/3 subgroups, teacher observations and assessments Identification of lowest 1/3 subgroups, teacher observations and assessments LEGO Robotics Small groups Afterschool Lunch time computer classes Small groups, tutoring Afterschool At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher observations and assessments, PPT team recommendations At-risk guidance services 1:1/small groups During school day/ Afterschool 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1.2% of our student population comes from temporary housing, which is a total of 4 children. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Once the children enter our school, we make sure they have enough supplies. Our work with non-profit organizations such as APEX for Youth provides ready made schoolbags with essential school materials including writing tools, reading materials and a dictionary. Also an initial assessment is completed with the math coach and reading recovery teacher to obtain baseline data of what the child knows and can do. Immediately we meet with the intervention team to provide additional AIS services in areas of need. In additional the children will be part of extended day programs and any enrichment activities deemed appropriate such as soccer, basketball, and Saturday programs. The classroom teacher continues to maintain assessments such as reading levels and scoring writing samples measured against curriculum rubrics. With the McKinney funds we purchase additional books for the children to create home libraries and additional consumable supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We at P.S. 1 are always working hard to attract and hire highly qualified individuals to work with our children. We have hiring committees that are organized to review resumes and create questions for interviews by grade and subject areas. We hope to hire the teacher as soon as possible. If we hire the new teacher before the end of the school year we have his/her shadow and work in teacher teams to experience and be exposed to team work and collaboration. Once a teacher is hired we provide them with a nuts and bolts binder of our school. It includes school safety and policies, the Danielson rubric, Common Core Learning Standards and Chancellor’s Regulations for human resources. Also there is a data section with the Framework for Great Schools and Quality Review Report. Furthermore we include a section for professional articles that addresses classroom environment and parent engagement. They will also have copies of the Teachers College Literacy curriculum and the first unit from Investigations in Math. In early September, the new teachers are highly encouraged to attend new teacher mentoring workshops and Teachers College workshops around setting up for reading and writing workshop. We set aside funds for teachers who have expertise in setting up classrooms and libraries to come in to support the newly hired. The administration spends additional time with the individual for check in and planning. The new teacher is then assigned a mentor teacher from the school. Depending on the position, we assign a mentor accordingly, i.e., if the new teacher is a special education teacher we assign the most experienced and effective special education teacher to her. In addition, the new teacher will be paired up or grouped with the other new teachers to work with the staff developers from TC. We schedule monthly new teacher meetings for follow up conversations around professional development workshops or learning cycles and to support new teachers with administrative duties. We also read articles and visit classrooms together to further scaffold their learning opportunities. Lastly, new teachers are encouraged to attend Professional Learning Opportunities offered by the Borough Field Support Center. 2018-19 CEP 41  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We at P.S. 1 are committed to continuing education and promoting a high quality of professional development. Throughout the school year, various grades are scheduled for professional development time with staff developers around curriculum and content based on the CCLS. Teachers and staff members work closely with staff developers from TCRWP program to focus on lesson planning and curriculum in reading and writing that focuses on the CCLS. In addition, our teachers and staff continue to develop math skills and knowledge with staff developers from Metamorphosis program. With continued demand to create strategies and activities to assist our ELL students, we continue to engage in our work with our staff developer, Fay Pallen. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Teachers and administrators align curriculum, hold joint professional development and parental involvement activities, as well as share records and interventions across all the grades. Since PS 1 is a pre-k to 5 th grade school, students are able to stay within the community throughout their elementary education. Students and parents in pre-k are invited and involved in joint assemblies, PTA meetings, workshops, and professional development opportunities as other students and parents are in the other grades. Student work, student progress, and sharing of records are passed along across grades between teachers during professional development time and teacher grade meetings. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 42  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and administrators participate in the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) and Advance Committees to assist in the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures within the school. In addition, teachers, parents, and administrators also participate in and analyze the assessment results to improve instruction by discussing possible assessment measures during School Leadership Team meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) See Section 5 action plan/progress monitoring See Section 5 action plan See Section 5 action plan/progress monitoring n/a See Section 5 action plan/progress monitoring Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 194,382.00 114,538.00 12,366.00 n/a 2,140,694.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 43  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Alfred E. Smith Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Alfred E. Smith Elementary School/ P.S. 1 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Alfred E. Smith Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 48  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 50  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Alfred E. Smith Elementary Public School 1 is located in Community District 2 in the heart of Chinatown. PS 1’s Title III program supplements instruction for English Native Learners and will target all 71 children of the school’s Entering, Emerging , Transitioning, and Expanding ENL students including newly arrived children. Our school wide focus ENL instructional focus is, "Making our critical thinking public". High Quality Instructional After School Title III Programs: Healthy Living - 1 ENL and/or 1 Bilingual Teacher/ 1 General Education Teacher Schedule: The After school Title III program will be scheduled for one and half hours after school, two days per week (Wednesdays and Fridays) for 20 weeks from November 1, 2018 through May 16, 2019 from 2:40 -4:10PM week cycles. The children will be serviced by a bilingual or ELL-licensed teacher in a small-group setting total of thirty students ranging from Entering, Emerging and Transitioning with former ENL students. This will be a total of 60 per session hours, 30 hours per teacher for 2 teachers. $60.65 for 60 hours is $3,639.00 Expenditures will include notebooks for a food journal, cooking ingredients, xeroxes for recipes, paper supplies and art supplies, i.e. markers and paint. We will create a recipe book for each child to document the learning. In grades 4 and 5, teachers will focus on language arts, math (measurements) and social studies by sharing recipes and discussing with the children where the ingredients come form and how to prepare for cooking. We will encourage the entering, emerging and transitioning ENL students to attend with the former ENL students. The former ENL students will be the peer mentors. They will go to the local American supermarkets and food stands to make purchases. After such trips the children will recreate their own supermarkets and food stands in the classrooms. Such experiences and opportunities will support them in their lives in society. It will engage the ENL children in a non-fiction content study, specifically focusing on learning to build their knowledge about nutrition and healthy living. This opportunity will allow the children to be exposed to specific language about good foods and bad foods. For part of the time, in the last 20 minutes of each session, the children will engage in activities to learn how foods are broken down by the body to create energy and support the development of different muscles. The children will be learning about the human body and how it works. They will be able to verbally identify body parts and how different activities uses different parts of the body and muscles. In addition we will provide additional time for the children to practice their reading on the Imagine Learning Program. History of New York City through the Eyes of P.S. 1 Kids - 1 ENL/Bilingual Teacher and/or 1 General Education Teacher Schedule: The After school Title III program will be scheduled for two hours after school, one day per week (Thursdays) for 15 weeks from November 1, 2018 through May 9, 2019 from 2:40-4:40PM. Four hours for planning at $60.65. Expenditures will include consumables such as writing journals, paper supplies, art tools, notebooks for journals, photo paper and color printer supplies, and related literature to support ELL literacy and language development. Consumables - $500.00 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In grades 2 and 3, teachers will focus on language arts and social studies from December 5, 2018 through March27, 2019 from 2:40-4:40PM. The program will be once a week for 2 hours. Grade 2 social studies curriculum focuses on New York City and the neighborhood. We will study how our neighborhood has changed over the past 100 years. We will focus on a landmark building and how the surrounding areas have evolved. The children will be engaged in photography and pictorials that shows the history of the neighborhood. The children will also make predictions based on past trends what the future of the neighborhood might look like. We will focus on terminology, vocabulary, and strategies to develop oral language. We will display their research and findings during our annual celebration and parent engagement night in May. We will highly encouraged the emerging and transitioning ENL students to attend. As part of pictorial documentation and the use of technology we will record and film segments for each class and have students critiques segments against student created rubrics for feedback. We will need supplies such as photo printers, photo paper, ink cartridges, memory sticks and cards, blank CDROMS to burn pictures, batteries for the camera and camera cases. The children will learn how to use the camera function on the IPADs to down load pictures, and create short documentaries of their experiences. They will create a power point presentation on CDROMS. In addition we will provide additional time for the children to practice their reading on the Imagine Learning program. Saturday Reading Empowers - Grades 1 & 2 - 1 ESL/1General Education - 9 Saturdays from October to May from 10:30-12:30PM. Saturday Title III ELA/Math Academy - Grades 4 & 5 - 1 ESL/1 General Education 20 Sessions from October to May from 10:00-12:00PM (10 Sessions in the Fall and 10 Sessions in the Spring) Schedule: The two Saturday programs will be scheduled for two hours from October through May. Reading Empowers is 9 sessions. This will be a total of 18 per session hours for 1 teachers. 18 hours at $60.65 per hour is $1,091.70. ELA/Math Academy - Grades 4 & 5 is 20 sessions. This will be a total of 20 per session hours for 1 teachers. 40 hours at $60.65 per hour is $2,426.00 Expenditures will be minimum since the teachers will be using books from the existing classroom. However we would like to purchase new titles for read alouds from Capstone Publishing and art supplies for the extension activity such as markers, colored paper, construction paper, butcher paper, colored paints, white painting canvases and assorted craypas, Total $500.00 In grade 1 & 2 the ENL students will be grouped according to the NYSITELL scores. Every child will be encouraged to attend their subgroups are Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding. The children will spend every Saturday in small groups of 10-15 children with the support of a teacher and 3 adult volunteers in the classroom. The children are engaged in a pre- selected read aloud, in small group discussions about the read aloud (to develop comprehension), and a hands-on activity related to the theme of the read aloud. The small groups will allow for every child to be heard. The teachers will plan and share lesson plans with volunteers. Also this program will increase the children’s oral language and literacy skills. The literacy strategies will be reinforced on Saturday thus giving the children another opportunity to learn the materials as discussed during the regular school day. This will increase the students overall performance and achievement. In the ELA/Math Academy, the Grade 4 &5 children will be grouped according to their subgroups entering, emerging , transitioning, and expanding. Every ENL student will be encouraged to attend. We will work in small groups with our students to support the classroom work and develop an understanding for the structure of the State ELA and Math exams. During these small group sessions the ENL students will be taking sample testing passages and 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information reviewing test taking strategies. At times they will be working on sample tests under regular testing conditions. Also they will be engaged in multiple choice questions and multiple step tasks and word problems. We will increase the students' vocabulary and further develop their test taking language. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Expenditure: Teachers Professional Books Striving to Thriving by Stephanie Harvey and Annie Ward and Understanding Texts & Readers Jen Serravallo - 10 copies of each $660.00 Staff Development is very important to our professional learning community. Staff development for teachers includes a support group for new K-5 teachers; new ENL teacher training and the Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Institutes with also has follow-up visits to participant’s classrooms by staff developers. ENL Teachers will have the opportunity to work with staff developers from Teacher’s College and attend Saturday reunions as well as calendar day workshops. Bilingual and ENL issues will also be addressed during faculty conferences, staff development days and PD Mondays (100 Minutes after schools professional development cycles), and monthly grade meetings as documented in our agendas and monthly calendars. This year will take a closer look at our classroom libraries to ensure diversity of characters and story lines that they can relate to. We want to create classroom libraries that support independent reading and match readers to books they'll love and support their growth. The Principal and Hongying Shen, Director of ELL from MFS will be working with the bilingual teachers in small groups and individually to model best practices and to learn about how the Chinese language works. Having extra time for the Title III program will bridge the work for the school day and after school bilingual programs. It will be on-going and in a continuous fashion instead of one shot workshops. This five-day professional learning series is designed to support teachers who works in Chinese bilingual programs. Participants will gain an common understanding of the Advanced Literacy Framework with a focus on Shift 1 Instructional Core. This offering will provide participants with practical, research-based strategies along with tools for developing students’ language and literacy skills in Chinese bilingual programs. Participants will also have an opportunity to review and adapt Chinese Language Arts and core content area instructional resources. Sessions will be conducted in both English and Chinese. They will be expected to turn key the information to the staff. From data gathered we will target grades 3, 4, & 5 ENL students for our inquiry project this year. We will continue to identify effective teaching practices. There will be no expenditures for Title III teachers attending professional development for school year 2018-2019. As a school we are: • Understanding the language development of ENL students to inform instruction • Differentiating and adapting instruction to meet the needs of ENL students • Observing and analyzing case study research of a small group of ENL students • Analyzing and interpreting data on ENLs to plan for meaningful instruction and intervention • Reading professional literature to inform ENL instruction 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development These will be all day sessions for ENL professional development. Tentative Schedule: Session #1 (incl. orientation): Thursday, September 20 Session #2: Thursday, September 27 Session #3: Monday, November 19 Session #4: Tuesday, January 8 Session #5: Tuesday , February 26 Session #6: Thursday , June 6 rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We have activities and programming for targeted parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. As we do as a community we will notify our parents by reaching out directly to parents face to face, recruit parents at PTA meetings, at drop off and pick up or any other times we engage with families. We will also distribute and hang flyers at locations frequented by parents. In addition we will ask parents participants to spread the word to other parents and ask participating parents to bring another participant to the next workshop. Additional workshops: · understanding of school literacy curriculum and provide strategies&nbsp;to support at home) - November&nbsp; -all day ($1,200.00) · Routines - September evening (and in May if necessary) from 4-7PM&nbsp;(The ENL Coordinator meets with parents&nbsp;to discuss curriculum modifications&nbsp;and strategies and explains the ELLs - screening, identification, placement, review, and exit criteria.)&nbsp; · child's comprehension of a text. - January, &nbsp;March and May - Tuesdays from 2:45- 3:45PM.&nbsp; We design a specific ELL workshops to address the needs of the parents and ELL students in grade K-1.&nbsp; The ENL coordinator works with the ENL teachers to facilitate these workshops for K and&nbsp;grade 1. ENL Parent Classes – Every Tuesdays from 8:30-10:30AM from October 16, 2018 - December 18, 2018 ( 9 sessions )and January 22, 2019 - April 16, 2019 (10 Sessions). Expenditure will include notebooks, writing utensils, loose leaf paper, xerox paper, and 2 individual children's books. The books will be used in class and be shared at home with their children. Materials - $200.00 The classes are taught by our Bilingual School Aide. This class was created as requested by the parents in a 2017-2018 needs assessment. The parents wanted to engage in English conversational class so they can begin to have verbal conversations with their children. These strategies continue to support the classrooms' instruction in terms of building oral language. Pre K ,K, and Grade 1 Parents Reading Workshop - Types of questions to ask to develop Teacher's College - Parents Literacy Workshops (Help ENL parents develop a deeper Family Engagement Night &nbsp;- &nbsp;Parent Orientations, Curriculum, and Math 2018-19 CEP 57 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Prior to the formation of each class, an assessment and interviewing process determine each participant’s language abilities in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. These assessments determine which course best fits the needs of each participant. Supplies purchased for each participant include student workbooks and conversational books with tapes. For the end-of-year celebration, English-Chinese dictionaries or Spanish-English dictionaries are purchased for each participant. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Alfred E. Smith Elementary School/ P.S.1 Borough Manhattan School Number 001 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amy Hom Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Chen Teacher/Subject Area Donna Yung Chan/Early Emergent Teacher/Subject Area Helen Yu/ Grade 4 Related-Service Provider Alyssa Levy Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal N/A Coach type here School Counselor Edwin Marrero Parent Joannie Wu Parent Coordinator Cindy Lau Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) Christine Wong, Special Educat C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 296 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 4 Mandarin K 0 2 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 2 2 0 1 1 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use as a school to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS are the TCRWP reading records, Concepts of Print and Letter/Sound Identification. We collect student reading levels four times a year using TC Assessment Pro to track student progress and performance. From our TCRWP data we noticed that we have 40% of our children including our ELL population are on or above grade level in grade K thru 5. For this 2017-2018 school year, we noticed that in September that 60% of our children including our ELL students need additional support. We are currently still gathering more comprehensive assessments to further inform our instructional practices. The TCRWP running records, NYSESLAT, and EDAT scores and information will be provided to classroom teachers and ENL teacher to support instruction. Throughout the school year, grade teams will meet with Staff 2018-19 CEP 60  Developers from Teachers College to review student work and assessments to plan lessons. Grade teams will meet monthly with administration to review lessons and plans. We are confident that the percentage of "needs support" will decrease during the school year as it had been in previous years. This information will allow teachers to identify literacy strengths and weaknesses of their ELL students and provide instruction that will meet the needs of their ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher will support classroom teachers with administering assessments and gathering data to further inform instruction. Grade teams will meet in weekly meetings to review data and plan instruction. Grade teams and ENL teacher will then meet with Staff Developers about once a month to review data, student work, and revise lessons to plan small group instruction. Grade teams and ENL teachers will meet with administration once a month to review lessons and plans. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers will use the TCRWP running record assessments four times (September, January, March, and June) during the school year. We will begin with a September baseline and continue to monitor student reading levels progress and needs throughout the school year with running records. The success of the program is dependent on the assessments and instruction. The Teachers College assessments are aligned to our instructional practices and curriculum thus validates our ELL students' progress. The ELL students proficiency scores from our School Quality Guide provided additional evaluation of success. We will also ensure a rigorous curriculum aligned to the Common Core Standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During monthly grade team meetings with administration, teachers will identify students who need interventions based on their assessments and student work. Then the ENL teacher will plan for small group push-in and pull-out sessions with grade teams for students. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers will meet with Staff Developers to plan small group work and lesson plans based on these specific students' summative data. After each unit, grade teams and ENL teacher will meet with administration and staff developers to review students work and assess student progress and learning and revise lesson plans for next unit of study. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data will show that the students scores in speaking and listening sections for the NYSESLAT is higher in proficiency than in the reading and writing sections. As a school we realize the importance of developing language and creating multiple opportunities for language to be used. This year as a school we are studying how to engage students in high-quality discussions, exemplified by responding to and extending each other's thinking and crafting questions to help each other deepen and elaborate upon their thinking. All teachers will be engaged in an inquiry process which will be focused on looking and analyzing student work. In terms of best practices, teachers will create multiple opportunities for all students to turn and talk and have whole class and small group conversations. The focus will be in small group conversations as well as one on one conversations. The teachers will use thinking templates and language building templates for our ELL students so that they have a place to begin their thinking and talking processes, i.e., "In this part ____ feels_____ , I know because______." These templates are also used for reading and writing. Our ELL teachers will continue to work with Dr. Lilllian Filmore and Fay Pallen, ELL Specialist around building academic vocabulary. In terms of interventions, our ELL teachers will continue to provide small group instruction and provide content driven curriculum for these students. We will continue to provide the children with opportunities to attend weekday and Saturday 2018-19 CEP 61  enrichment classes which are aligned to the balance literacy program . The children will engage in shared reading with complex text and strategies around "close readings." The work from the classrooms will be presented in smaller groupings or individually. Currently we have Saturday reading programs for grades 1, 2& 3 and test prep programs for grade 4 & 5 (ENL Students and At-risk level 2& 3) Students . We will continue to build our enrichment programs from grades 1-5 especially for our ENL students. Our grade 4 teachers and a Reading Recovery teacher were involved with the VTS, Visual Thinking Strategy work. VTS has helped our ELL students build their language skills and vocabulary. The students have become more expressive and think more critically. VTS has also helped the quieter students find their voice and build confidence in sharing their ideas. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns from school year 2016-2017 on NYSESLAT indicates a positive increase of up to 3% of our ELL students that scored within the Expanding and Commanding levels. Overall our ELL students scored the following: 5.2% scored at the Entering level, 7.8% at the Emerging level, 31.2% at the Transitioning level, 46% at the Expanding level, 9.0% at the Commanding level. The NYSITELL Exam is administered within the ten day limit. This indicates if children have acquired the English Language. Also as we receive scores from our initial assessments and performance tasks, and we do believe these first year students will score as beginners. We gathered additional educational background data in terms of how many of these children went to pre-school (in America or their native country) and how many of their parents have higher education backgrounds from the home language surveys. We then begin the initial ENL cycle serviced by ENL licensed staff for all the beginner ELLs from grades K-5 giving them additional direct instruction in a small group setting. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The school team collects NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores and TCRWP running records at the beginning of the school year for all students. The ENL teacher provides a class list with NYSESLAT levels and running record levels to each classroom teacher. Grade teams meet in weekly meetings to discuss the data information and to plan instruction. Then grade teams and ENL teachers meet with Staff Developers and administration to review planning, instruction, and student assessment. Administration and ENL teachers meet to plan programming. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organization models include push-in, collaborative, and self contained which are integrated models. The program models are blocked when the ENL students move from grade to grade or across the grade in heterogeneous grouping. In the Dual Language (Mandarin) classes they are integrated models where classes provide full day instruction to students in needs of English language development alongside students who have are learning Mandarin and English is the home language. Half of the students' instruction is in English and students receive the other half of instruction in Mandarin. Instruction in Mandarin is taught through the content areas and literacy, such as ELA and Social Studies. Stand-alone ENL is implemented by having an ENL teacher are assigned to particular classes from kindergarten to 2018-19 CEP 62  grade 5 to focus instruction with mandated students and also to push-in to the classroom in order to maximize time and direct student support. The ENL teachers provide instruction in English in core content areas based on each child's language proficiency level in order to further develop their English language skills. The ENL teacher also provides core content area instruction. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher consult to determine the best mode of grouping students based on proficiency levels and/or topic of instruction. Based on the number of students required to receive mandated ENL services, the ENL teachers might have to split up a grade to work with a specific class in order to fulfill the CR Part 154 Requirements. The ENL teacher provides at least 180 minutes of instruction in a content area, such as Social Studies or a unit of study in ELA. The ENL teachers provide stand-alone ENL instruction to students who scored at a proficiency level of "Entering" or "Emerging" by pushing-in or pulling the students out of the classroom for 180 minutes a week. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: In Kindergarten and first grade, the Dual Language programs are the side by side model. In second and third grade, the Dual Language programs are self-contained models. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Accordingly ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes are counted as fifty minute periods a day. We follow all federal and state mandates as per CR Part 154. Explicit ENL delivered in each program: The free standing program has licensed ENL teachers as the classroom teachers. We integrate the balanced literacy program and we use Investigations for math. We feel it is important for the children to develop their oral language through accountable talk. The children are read to often and teachers use strategies from shared reading to work in small group settings. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Imagine Learning (computer based program), Great Leaps, or Making Meaning. An ENL teacher will provide 180 minutes of small group work and direct instruction to students who are "Transitioning" or "Expanding" proficiency levels during an ELA content study lesson. An ENL teacher will provide 360 minutes of small group work and direct instruction around ELA work to students who are "Entering" and "Emerging" proficiency levels. Explicit ELA delivered in each program: We integrate the balanced literacy program. We feel it is important for the children to develop their oral language through accountable talk. The children are read to often and teachers use strategies from shared reading to work in small group settings. We also follow Teachers College reading and writing units of study. We have reading and writing workshop as well as time for children to read independently from leveled book bins. Also we provide the students individual and small group instruction with the literacy teachers and licensed ENL content teachers, i.e., Reading Recovery. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Imagine Learning (computer based program), Great Leaps, or Making Meaning. Explicit HLA delivered in each program In our school, we provided ENL free standing classes therefore one HLA class a week in ELA is provided for all students who are "Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, or Commanding" proficiency levels. 2018-19 CEP 63  Also to assure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels: The implication for the school’s instruction includes making sure we are servicing the children as mandated by CR Part 154. We identify which children are entitled to services and weekly schedules are posted on the classrooms' doors to indicate the ENL periods. Every teacher receives training and a copy of the ATS generated report. All students with "Entering" or "Emerging" proficiency levels will receive 360 minutes per week of mandated ENL instruction. Students with "Transitioning" or "Expanding" proficiency levels will receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Students with "Commanding" proficiency level will receive 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The goals throughout our school-based planning and program implementation have been to prepare all our students to be responsible and productive participants in the community. Our focus has been on developing communication skills and critical thinking skills in all content areas especially for our second language learners. Also we will continue to collect interim data and analyze the periodic assessments to support the children’s learning and our teaching practices. We will also deepen our work with the Common Core Standards to align with our curriculum especially for our ELL students focusing on the Language standards. The classrooms throughout the school are print and language rich environments in which children work cooperatively and are provided with experiences through which they learn to think, question, and to take risks. The children are encouraged and given opportunities to evaluate their own learning using student rubrics. High standards and expectations are clear to all and there are constant discussions about children’s responsibility to do their best. P.S. 1 services the English Language Learners through self contained free standing classrooms. All classes are heterogenously grouped. We have ENL licensed teachers and Bilingual licensed teachers as well as dual certified teachers. Teachers in these classrooms are New York State ENL licensed instructors. In addition to supporting ELL instruction, licensed ENL/ Bilingual small group teachers push–in to the classroom for whole class instruction and pull-out students for small group instruction. In grades 1 through grade 5, there are an average of 5-10 ELL students in at least two classes per grade who are identified as "Transitioning" or "Expanding" who receive 180 minutes of instruction a week. There are 2 children identified as "Entering" proficiency level in grades 3, 4, & 5 and they receive 360 minutes of small group instruction and push-in instructional support a week. We use a child's Native Language when deemed necessary and instruction is delivered by licensed ENL and Bilingual teachers. ELLs will meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards through whole class and small group instruction across the grade levels. At- risk grade 1 English Language Learners are eligible for the Reading Recovery Program. This is an early intervention program that targets children in grade one who might be at-risk for reading failure. The reading recovery teacher works daily one-on–one with children selected for this program. This teacher is a bilingual licensed teacher. In Kindergarten, the ENL licensed teachers are team teaching with another teacher on the grade to support the ENL learners. In addition the grades K, 1, 2 and 3 ENL students and at-risk students will be serviced in a small group setting by additional reading specialist teachers who are ELL licensed. These teachers will be expected to push-in with students in the classroom. They will focus on specific reading, writing, speaking, and listening strategies similar to the balanced literacy program. These teachers will work alongside the classroom teachers to plan for each of their ELL students. Working portfolios and attendance will be used to track assessments and the progress of each student in addition to results from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, New York State ELA, MOSL and Math scores in grades 3,4, & 5 and the Acuity Interim Assessments. In grades 4 and 5, the ELL students are placed with an ENL/Bilingual licensed teacher for full day instruction. The teachers will work with these students individually and in small groups. Additional sessions in small groups will service these children. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 64  ELL students in the DL program are evaluated in their home language through class assessments, conferencing time with teachers, and student work throughout ELA units during the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Planning for ELLs to differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups: a. If we had SIFE Students – we will provide the students small group instruction with the literacy teachers and licensed ESL content teachers. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations, Wilson or Great Leaps. We will continue to use software programs such as Imagine Learning to support the children's literacy progress. b.ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers). These students are tracked every year. We place these students in free standing ESL classes with ESL licensed teachers for full day instruction. We use additional assessments such as TCWRP assessments and reading records to monitor progress. If no progress is made, we search out alternative resources including special needs materials and strategies to support the child. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations for phonemic awareness with the younger children or new comers, and Wilson for decoding and phonemic awareness with the older children or new comers in the upper grades, including Imagine Learning (computer based program). c. ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years These students tend to be tracked every year. We placed these students in free standing ESL classes with ESL licensed teachers for full day instruction. We use additional assessments such as TCWRP assessments, NYSESLAT, reading records, and performance assessments to monitor progress. We also make sure they receive extra services from our Title III programs and extended day services with small group interventions from reading specialists. If no progress is made we search out alternative resources including special needs materials and strategies to support the child. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations for phonemic awareness and Wilson for decoding and phonemic awareness with the older children or new comers in the upper grades. Furthermore we use a computer program called Imagine Learning to support and monitor the child's progress. d. Long- term ELLs (in NYC six or more years) These students are often limited because they will only be six years if the actually started their school with us from Pre-Kindergarten. Pending on the mandates they need to receive at this point, we hope the time has lessen. In these cases the child can be pulled out in small group or one on one settings with the literacy teachers. This one- on- one service is very intensive, modeled after the reading recovery program. If not, we place these children in free standing ESL classes with ESL licensed teachers for full day instruction. We use additional assessments such as TCWRP assessments, Interim assessments, NYSESLAT, and reading records, and performance assessments to monitor progress. If no progress is made, we search out alternative resources including special needs materials and strategies to support the child. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations and Wilson for decoding and phonemic awareness with the older children or Great Leaps to build fluency. Furthermore we use a computer program called Imagine Learning to support and monitor the child's progress. e. Former ELLs (years 1 and 2 after testing proficient) These students will be monitored consistently throughout the year using assessments such as TCWRP assessments, performance assessments and reading records to monitor progress. If needed, small group instruction will be provided by the classroom teacher, and/or other assistants, such as an America Reads tutor. These students may also qualify for additional assistance by using programs such as Foundations, Wilson or Great Leaps to assist with their learning. 2018-19 CEP 65  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use the reading and writing workshop model from Teacher's College to provide access to academic content areas and to accelerate English language development. During the units of study, students integrate the strategies learned into their work and utilizes materials such as the class word wall, individual word list, complex texts, various paper choices, leveled books as well as work in appropriate literacy centers. The development of teaching materials is also differentiated so that all students within a classroom can learn effectively, regardless of differences in ability. Teachers begin with grade level strategies and lesson and will differentiate the lesson with various leveled texts and books. The students also work with the Fundations program for decoding and phonemic awareness. Teachers create UDL to differentiated instruction so that they can provide students with various methods to meet the needs of the students. UDL or Universal Design by Learning is utilized to provide accessibility to the reading and writing curriculum, focusing on helping students reach Common Core Learning Standards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use assessments such as TCWRP assessments Interim assessments, NYSESLAT, performance tasks, on demand reading and writing tasks and reading records to monitor progress. We will follow the mandates on IEPs. We provide blocked programs within the class for the needs of ELLs-SWDs. Also we provide the students small group instruction with the literacy teachers and licensed ESL content teachers. ELL-SWD students may also be pushed into another class with the ESL teacher to provide their service in a content area such as social studies. The flexible scheduling allows our bilingual speech provider to also push into the ESL content class to support ELL-SWD students. The Occupational Therapist will also push into an ESL content lesson to support any hands on learning. There is content learning instruction in science, social studies, music, and art. The older students work as mentors to the younger students to provide peer tutoring for example in our Penny Harvest and Young People's Chorus groups. We also have paraprofessionals that assist the ELL-SWDs in all content areas for example we trained two paras in Reading Rescue. In addition, we have Title III enrichment programs such as the Family Literacy Theater and Heathy Me programs, i.e, sports and the Runner's Club. In addition we will assess the child to see if the child would qualify for programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Imagine Learning (computer based program) or Great Leaps. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently all our ranges of intervention services are offered in English. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA include the Fundations and Wilson programs, guided reading with TC PRO reading records, and the literacy software program Imagine Learning. Also the reading recovery teacher services students whose native language is Chinese and our bilingual music teacher provides services in Spanish. These programs target our students with a proficiency level of "Entering", "Emerging", and "Transitioning". In addition, we have a Math Coach who provides small group pull-out and class push-in services to all proficiency leveled ELL students across the grades. Our Science coach and science teacher service the third and fifth grade students with a proficiency level of "Entering", "Emerging", and "Transitioning" with small group science lessons at least three times a week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering additional programs on Saturdays for our ELLs such as conversational art programs which we are piloting in the summer for 5 sessions for one hour to target further instruction with students with a proficiency level of "Transitioning" and "Expanding". According to our 2016-2017 NYSESLAT results, PS 1 has the highest percentages of students scoring at the "Transitioning" and "Expanding" level. Another opportunity we will engage the "Transitioning" and "Expanding" ELL children is in a non-fiction content study, 2018-19 CEP 66  specifically focusing on learning to build their knowledge about nutrition and healthy living. This opportunity will allow the children to be exposed to specific language about good foods and bad foods. For part of the time, in the last 20 minutes of each session, the children will engage in activities to learn how foods are broken down by the body to create energy and support the development of different muscles. The children will be learning about the human body and how it work. They will be able to verbally identify body parts and how different activities uses different parts of the body and muscles. The children will engage in team and individual sports. In this program we will invite former ELL students to attend. This program will be scheduled for one and one half to two hours after school, once per week for ten weeks. In addition, most of the classrooms are equipped with a Smart Board and Ipad. There are many interactive websites and apps that can assist the ELL students in all academic areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not close a Dual Language program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We ensured that our ELL population are provided equal access to programs and services. Our ELL children are given the same or at times additional opportunities for after school and supplement services. They are included in all school activities and programs with The National Dance Institute, American Ballroom Dance Institute, Young People’s Chorus, Penny Harvest, Lego Robotics, Cookshop, Grade 3 National Dance Institute, Grade 4 NY Historical Society, Grade 2 Swim Program, Grade 2 Architecture Program , Spoons Across America Grade 5 Dinner Party, APEX Saturday Reading Empowers program and Asia Society. There are other resources that our ELL students participate in including: Everybody Wins, America Reads and America Counts with Pace University and New York University, Asian American Council, APEX for Youths, Brooklyn and Manhattan International High Schools Interns, American Ballroom Theater, and American Ballet Theatre. In Grade 4 and 5 for our Saturday ELA program, we understand an ELL at a beginner's level will find test prep challenging and overwhelming. So a group of two or three children in Grade 4 on the same level (assessment) will then work with two tutors who speak their native language. The tutors are exposing the children to conversational English and giving them strategies to navigate the school and their new community. This year, a program called Reading Empowers is servicing 90 students from grades 1 ,2,& 3. This number of attendees had tripled since beginning last year. They meet twice a month for two hours on a Saturday. The children are in small groups of 5-6. The volunteers are trained by classroom teachers to read and have conversations with the children. Also we are continuing out partnership with the NYC Food Bank. All students in grades Pre-K to 1 are participating in a nutrition/cooking program called Cookshop. The purpose of Cookshop is to promote a lifelong, healthy lifestyle. The program starts with educating children about healthy eating habits and how to prepare healthy foods. The students, in turn, will encourage their parents to buy healthier foods and to develop nutritious eating habits. Next, they hope to change the surrounding community in providing nutritious food to the neighborhood. Therefore, once a week, students are taught about developing a healthier lifestyle. Another program that we have this year is the Swim program for the 2nd graders. Once a week, during the school day in the afternoon, 2nd grade students are participating in swim lessons by qualified instructors at the local YMCA. In addition, for Grade 3 they work with the National Dance Institute and the science teacher to upkeep our school garden and learn about composing. During after school, 4th and 5th grade ELL students across all proficiency levels are able to participate in a Nutrition and Healthy Lifestyle class. Students review their journals to find trends and habits to promote healthy food choices for a balanced life. Students in 4th and 5th grade meet once a week for a 90 minute session. ELL students across all proficiency levels also are able to participate in Chorus. Students learn to read music and receive voice instruction as a group to perform songs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 67  We made purchases from many companies as well as from National Geographic to support our ELL students in non-fiction studies and trade books. We purchased several series of publishers including Benchmark, Wright, Mondo, and Steck Vaughn to purchase emergent list books as well as leveled libraries for independent reading and classroom libraries. We use tools such as computers, books on tape, and the document reader to provide visuals and listening supports. We want our ELL children to engage in multiple opportunities to develop oral language, therefore they need opportunities to listen to the English language and use it in context. So we have purchased singing machines and tape recorders for the children to use at home. In addition, we invest in instructional intervention programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Great Leaps, Spire, and Imagine Learning (computer based program) or Making Meaning. Also we have the Navigator for mathematical intervention. We also provided all classrooms with ELL children with Smart Boards also to be used with Internet search engines like Google earth and interactive websites. We have Elmos projectors in which students can view print materials. Most of the teachers are also using iPad2s in the classroom to support their ELL students with writing. ELL students also work on the iPads and computers to access the Imagine Learning computer program for additional literacy work. Imagine Learning is tailored to each individual student's level. We are continually training our staff to be aware how the ELL students are visual learners. We work hard to differentiate materials such as books and activities to support all learners including the ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language is used only when necessary in our free standing ESL classes. In most cases, teachers use native language with the beginners and intermediate learners. We also purchased a variety of bilingual dictionaries/pictionaries so that all classrooms have these resources for their ELLs to use. Alternative language paraprofessionals are assigned for SE ESL students who require that support as noted in their IEPs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, our required services support, and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grades levels. (See response to question 6.) 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We made purchases from many companies as well as from National Geographic to support our ELL students in non-fiction studies and trade books. We used several series of publishers including Benchmark, Wright, Mondo, and Steck Vaugn to purchase emergent list books as well as leveled libraries for independent reading and classroom libraries. We use tools such as computers, books on tape, and the document reader to provide visuals and listening supports. We want our ELL children to engage in multiple opportunities to develop oral language, therefore they need opportunities to listen to the English language and use it in context. So we have purchased singing machines and tape recorders for the children to use at home. In addition, we invest in intervention programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Great Leaps, Imagine Learning (computer based program) or Making Meaning. Also we have the Navigator for mathematical intervention. We also provided all classrooms with ELL children with Smart Boards also to be used with Internet search engines like google earth and interactive websites. We have Elmos projectors in which students can view print materials. Most of the teachers are also using IPAD2 in the classroom to support their ELL students. We are continually training our staff to be aware how the ELL students are visual learners. We work hard to differentiate materials such as books and activities to support all learners including the ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELL students before beginning the school year, school administration, teachers (ENL, reading specialist and math coach) and/or parent coordinator meets with parents to survey the educational history of their child. We assess the child quickly using the Teacher's College Reading Records. In late June, we identify incoming students and parents for September. We schedule each child with the parent for a 45 minute interview. The children will go with ESL licensed teachers 2018-19 CEP 68  for a TCWRP assessment of Concept about Print and Letter/Sound Identification. In turn our parent coordinator will meet to interview each parents to provide background information for their child that includes school history, family make up, and information about their child’s learning habits. We provide simple books on tape and videos to begin exposing the child to language. Our parent coordinator also provides a list of community activities the child and family can be involved with. For the past few summers, if the child qualifies in grades 2-5 for the Title III summer program, we enroll the child for six weeks. The programs exposes the child to content specific studies with an ESL or Bilingual licensed teacher and ESL student teacher in a class or no more than 20. The program focus on building oral language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school, language electives do not apply to our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Side by side Dual Language is implemented for grades Kindergarten and 1. The self-contained model is used for 2nd and 3rd grades. The program is a Mandarin Dual Language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1/2) Staff development for teachers includes a support group for new teachers as well as New Teacher Training in August. Also the teachers will have the opportunity to work with staff developers from Teacher’s College and attend Saturday Reunions as well as calendar day workshops. In addition, Teacher’s College offered a series of ELL focused workshops for teachers with self contained and small group classes. ESL issues will also be addressed during faculty conferences, staff development days, and monthly grade meetings. In addition we will train teachers to implement literacy intervention programs such as Foundations, Wilson, Great Leaps, Imagine Learning (computer based program) or Making Meaning. Staff developers, Shana Frazin and Danielle Schwartz, and Fay Pallen (ELL Network Specialist) will be working with teachers in groups and individually to model best ELL literacy practices. Our Science Coach, Jack Ruolo will continue to work with new teachers and mentor teachers on each grade to address issues dealing with developing an understanding of Science content knowledge and ESL strategies. Our math coach, Ellen McCrum provides math staff development to our teacher teams. Our September staff development days included strategies for assessing all children including through conferencing and observations as well as aligning Common Core Learning Standards to our curriculum. In addition teachers on the grade and across grade spent time analyzing assessments and planning for instruction. We will continue this year to focus on developing our leveled libraries to make sure every child had a text to engage in during independent reading. We asked the children, what they were reading and how do they know the books were just right for them. We will continue to look at the components of the Language Allocation Policy. We will continue to work with Mary Chen, our ELL Intervention teacher to attend and turn key information from cohort meetings and workshops. Also aligning to these workshops, two teachers (grade 3 and ELL intervention teacher) will be attending monthly ELL workshops with Maryann Cuchiara and Fay Pallen and with other ELL teachers to share effective strategies and to support academic language in classrooms. This is our fifth year participating in this program. In addition we will have Kaye Lawson, an AUSSIE staff developer work with ELL teachers to implement strategies to support the children in the classroom. She will plan with data and focus on an inquiry group based on the data. 2018-19 CEP 69  Previously through District 2's professional development opportunities, teachers were able to develop a collegial and collaborative relationship. They shared their plans and created multiple opportunities for their children to work and learn together in their classrooms. We are part of the Integrated Curriculum and Instruction Learning Support Organization so that we can continue to be committed to professional development. We believe in many models of good instruction so we are carving out opportunities for our teachers to grow as learners within the school. Presently we have mentors who work with teachers, who have taught less than three years. Mentor – Teacher (Experienced) mentors New Teachers: 1. Christine Wong Lower 12:1:1 gr K, 1& 2 mentors new teachers *Grace Ferrara Upper 12:1:1 gr 3,4, & 5. 2. Maria Willis mentors Linda Gao- 2nd grade ICT 3. Arleen Chiu mentors Kara Adamik - Kindergarten ICT 4. Harriet Savitz mentors Matthew Sutherland Physical Eduation Teacher 5. Amy Carpenter mentors Lindsey O'Connell -3 rd grade ICT 6. *Helen Yu mentors *Liza Weinstein - 4 th grade Also we have two teachers involved with the New Teacher Training Program. *ESL/ BIL State Licensed Teachers. We have _ NYS licensed ESL teachers and _Bilingual Certified Teachers. ** Teacher licenses are filed in the main office with the personnel/payroll secretary Tentative Staff Development Calendar Month Topic Audience September-October Using on demand tasks for assessment and score tasks All Staff according to narrative rubric. Differentiation of Instruction/Strategies for Assessing ELLs (Identify target groups for inquiry team study); Share understanding of the Common Core Standards in ELA; Identify the performance Tasks - four all together 2 in MATH and 2 in ELA, plot along time line Planning for family engagement - focus on math workshop identify vertical strand to showcase November Planning for Instruction for ELLs/ Aligning Curriculum to the Common Grade Teachers Core Language Standards. Looking at multi levels of non fiction books and materials to begin discussions around non-fiction study December Language Allocation Policy -revisit All Staff January – February Looking at student data to document progress and growth as a reader. Identifying content areas for integrated study Preparing for ELA& Math State Exams March- April Preparing for the NYSESLAT/ ELA and Math All Staff Goal setting - using data to create individual student goal May –June End of the year planning; looking at reading and writing All Staff calendars for the follow year; Share Inquiry Team Projects Identify and send permission slips for grade 2-5 students for ELL Success Program during summer 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 70  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The supports we provide staff to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary school to middle school are extra sessions with the guidance counselor to talk to the students about the change. We also provide extra support from the Charles B. Wang Clinic to discuss bodily changes which can be socially and emotionally challenging. In addition, we provide the children with a day of inner resilience activities workshops are facilitated by trained teachers. Furthermore we plan a career day with the children in grades 4 and 5 to prepare them with personal small group interactions with professionals. All our staff including the ELL and Bilingual teachers are involved in multiple professional development opportunities that are on-going and sustained through out the school year. We have worked with Teacher's College literacy curriculum for the past 18 years. Each year, we work with Teacher's College (Reading and Writng Project) for 20 days (10 days for K-2 and 10 days for grades 3-5 teachers) which involves the staff developers modeling and coaching instructional practices, analyzing students work together (using pre- and post assessments and planning next steps based on the data and students' needs. Furthermore the teacher teams plan the lesson with the staff devleoper and implement the lesson in each other classrooms. We have 15 days for Math Workshops with Ellen McCrum from Metamorphsis, she follows the Japanese lesson planning model where the teachers work collaboratively to plan the lesson, implement the lesson and replan the lesson to make the lesson even more effective based on students' work. Our ELL teachers are also attending a series of one day ELL workshops offered by the Department of Education and Borough Field Office. For this first cycle of Monday PDs of six weeks for Bilingual Special Education teachers lead by the Division of Teaching and Learning from the Borough Field Office, six PS 1 teachers including 2 ELL teachers, are part of this professional learning community in which inquiry is utilized to strenghten teachers' knowledge about how to effectively integrate assessment into instruction. The goal is to develop knowledge of students through examination of Common Core Learning Standards aligned assessments practice. This professional development cycle is lead by instructors from the Bilingual Also we have two teachers, 1 Bilingual and 1ESL engaged in the Kellog Grant which means the two teachers attend a full day session every 6-8 weeks to observe best ELL practices in ESL,Bilingual or Dual Language classrooms in grades K-3. The teachers observe the lessons with a copy of the lesson/unit plans aligned to CCLS and all related materials including read aloud titles and student work rubrics. Then the group of 25 ELL teachers from 6 different schools with the population of at least 50% second language learners together debrief and plan how to incorporate ELL strategies into their own practices and classroom. Before the teachers leave each session they reflect and think about one thing they would try to implement immediately. For the beginning of next session, the group begins with a discussion and share about what they tried in terms of teaching and learning. The team of ESL teachers including the 3 bilingual teachers and 6 ESL teachers works collaboratively to offer professional development around ELL practices during a cycle of 4-5 sessions on Monday PD for 80 minute blocks. They are the facilitators to turn key the information to the rest of the staff. In additional we also use the two Chancellor's Professional Development days to provide opportunities for vertical planning and to include issues and challenges we are facing in support the ELL learners in meeting Common Core Learning Standards. We also spend time analyzing the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data. Furthermore we gather data from informal and formal observations, pre- and post- assessments from performance tasks, reading records, and interim assessments to plan for effective teaching strategies for all our ELL learners. In addition to the above mentioned professional development opportunities for ELL teachers we are also working with Visual Thinking Strategies for our second year to look at impact on ELL students as participants in discussion or acquisition of vocabulary in grades 4 and 5. We are training three additional teachers this year one of which is an ELL licensed teacher. In terms of documentation and how records are maintained, the teachers working with VTS Strategies and the Kellog Grant produce a unit plan and are asked to complete individual inquiry projects. For example last year one of our ELL teachers in grade 4, Helen Yu, presented a webinar in August with VTS about her inquiry ELL small group work during the school year. Her inquiry project included artifacts, transcripts and videos. In June for the Chancellor's Professional Development Day, as a 2018-19 CEP 71  team, they present their inquiry to the school which includes a performance task, students' data, teacher's next steps, and reflections. A major focus and component of their presentation was the work progress with ELL students and ELL academic achievement. After their presentations all the PowerPoint's were submitted through Google Docs . We uploaded all the presentations for the school to share as well as our network and cluster teams. In addition agendas and attendance sign in sheets along with hand-outs for workshops are used for documenting year- long professional development meetings which our teachers participate in. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Oral translation services are provided by in-house staff (teachers, counselors, school psychologists, parent coordinators, community volunteers, school aides). Staff members are fluent in the different Chinese dialects that represent our parent population (Cantonese, Mandarin, Toishanese, and Fujianese). We also have staff members who are fluent in Spanish who are called upon when translation is needed. Oral translations are provided for all PTA and school meetings including School Leadership Team meetings. The school works with parents to ensure that convenient appointments are made so that accurate translation is always available for conferences with teachers and support service teachers. During parent workshops and PTA meetings, parents are grouped with a translator so they receive the information and are able to participate by asking questions and giving opinions. Translators can be the parent coordinator, community coordinator, school aides, and volunteers from community based organizations, APEX for Youth, American Reads tutors and/or teachers. Often we include past graduates from PS 1 who are in high school or college with a command of the native language to support us with oral translations. We also stagger the times of oral translations in other languages to ensure a translator will be present for students' progress reports. Thus requires planning on both the administrative as well as the teaching staff. Finally all documents send out from PS 1 are translated in Chinese and Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Involvement and parent engagement are the main foci in our school. We have a great deal of outreach besides the necessary involvement which includes the School Leadership Team and other similar committees. Cindy Lau, our parents coordinator with the support of our Resource Coordintor from Community Learning School UFT, work together to develop a survey for our parents which we give out twice. The survey consisted of questions such as, "What kind of programs and services do you think would help your child/children have greater success in school?, Do you have computer/internet access?, and What kinds of adult programs would help you?" Some of the questions were also linked to low responses on the School Surveys from 2014-2015. Cindy would reach out to our community to locate speakers and workshops to identify and support the ELL parents' needs. For example, Cindy had called the local library, Chatham Square Library and found out that they provide computer literacy and basic sessions for ELL parents who want to learn how to navigate programs within the DOE, i.e., STARS reports or learn how to set up an email account. Cindy will look for, set up appointments for, and facilitate parents for workshops and information sessions. We have a Family Room for parents to socialize and meet other parents. All parents including those of English Language Learners are provided with an orientation on State Standards assessments, school expectations and general program requirements early in the school year at PTA meetings and in grade specific parent orientation meetings. We work with the parent coordinator, literacy coaches and science coach to design and to implement series workshops to assist the parents of English Language Learners in understanding the school curriculum, particularly balanced literacy and TERC Investigations. It will be our third year as a Community Learning School. The idea behind the concept is to make our school into a community" hub" where children and their families have access to all types of programs and services including health, youth development activities, tutoring, counseling programs, health education programs and social services. We hope to build a family centered 2018-19 CEP 72  wing in our building which will include a family room, an office space for the resource coordinator and social worker, and a conference room for workshops and activities just for parents and teachers. During the first two weeks in September, we schedule parent orientations for each grade so that teachers have the opportunity to meet in their classrooms with their parents to identify needs and expectations. Translators are provided and curriculum calendars and materials are translated. Tentative workshops are planned and scheduled during the meetings in October and November, and then again in March and April during both periods of the parent teacher conferences. There will be two annual meetings with parents during parent teacher conference week to discuss and share information regarding the ELL/ bilingual programs. In addition, we will continue to provide instruction once a week for two hours from October through May for selected English Language Learners in grades kindergarten through five focusing on a content area of study i.e., ballroom dancing, science, and sports. We have encouraged parents to volunteer and attend these extended school day sessions. We also have family activities to encourage involvement. In addition with the Common Core Learning Standards in full implementation we have designed a schedule where parent workshops are offered every six weeks. Most of the workshops are in school however several are located outside of school including Teacher's College at Columbia University and UFT parent conferences at their headquarters. Furthermore, one of the main roles of our parent coordinator, Cindy is to organizes school wide parent groups to attend city wide workshops relating to ELL issues. She is readily available to support parents with any issues dealing with ELL services and mandates by phone or meeting during her office hours. She is located in the main office which is central for our ELL parents especially. We have sent translators with Cindy and our parents to the Teacher’s College Parents Workshops for the past three years in October and November. The workshops are focused on assisting parents with building literacy strategies for their children. We always include a component from every grant for parental involvement. The past few years we noticed the increase number of grandparents caring for the young children. We hope to continue to work the DOE Department of Aging to successfully have a monthly support group for grandparents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amy Hom, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Alfred E. Smith Elementary School DBN: 02M001 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Amy Hom N/A Cindy Lau Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Mary Chen Ing ENL/Bilingual Teacher Joannie Wu Parent Donna Yung Chan Teacher/Subject Area Helen Yu Jack Ruolo Angela Chi Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Edwin Marrero School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Yuet Chu Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 2018-19 CEP 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M001 School Name: P.S. 1Alfred E. Smith Elementary Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mary Christine Chen Ing Wong ENL Coordinator IEP Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 1 uses the Home Language Survey to gain information as to which language is most often used at home. The home language surveys will be signed off by a licensed pedagogy. In the beginning of the school year, the parent coordinator and the community coordinator will work together to provide the parent community with a needs assessment survey. The survey also asks parents in what language they would like to receive school information. Based on the surveys, we provide services for the parents from curriculum workshops to ESL classes. We received 174 survey returns requesting language translations . From this data, we then strategically provide same workshops simultaneously in specific languages. 2018-19 CEP 76  In addition according to our 2016 NYC School Survey Report, 80% of our parents indicated that paper translated materials were the best way to get information home about the children and school. We had workshops with parents to discuss how STAR reports will assist them in following their child’s progress in school on the internet. We plan to have additional workshops to support our parents in registering for NYC School Accounts in September and October. We hope to increase the parents' use on other forms of communications to include email. Additional language data is also reviewed from ATS. Approximately 230 families speak Chinese (majority speak Mandarin and the remaining speak Cantonese and an unknown Chinese dialect). We also have 18 families speaking Spanish and the remaining families speak English. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Any Cantonese Mandarin Spanish 183 172 0 0 22 48.54 45.62 0 0 5.84 180 164 2 8 23 47.75 43.5 0.53 2.12 6.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families - School Policies including safety protocols, attendance and lateness, discipline code of behavior, and school expectations (these policies change and are revised according to Chancellor's Regulations. Beginning of each month (Sept. 2018-June 2019) Sept. 2018 and June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The teachers will provide an electronic copy of the English version to the translators at least 2 weeks prior to the deadline. The translators will use before or after school time to translate the materials and send back to the teachers for copying or distribution to families. 2018-19 CEP 77  -Classroom monthly newsletters in grades PreK-Grade 1 September, November 2018 and January, March, May and June 2019 Parent Orientation notices and flier May and June 2019 The translated materials are provided to every family so that they are well informed of school and classroom events and policies by backpacking it home with the students. -Principal's Bi-Monthly curriculum letters, tri-annual letters and reminders December 2018 and January 2019 -Graduation grades/ programs and events for Preks, K and Grade 5 October 2018 to May 2019 In addition we strategically placed three bulletin boards that display the same translated information, one outside the main office, second one outside the PTA family room, and third outside the lunchroom where families drop off and pick up students. - Open House information notices for Grade Prek & K -Parent Workshops information flier November and March and May 2019 September 2018-May 2019 - Parent Teacher Conferences and Engagement parent letters and flier October 2017-June 2018 Additional handouts are shared during school leadership team and general PTA meetings. Families are also able to pick up extra hard copies of all materials in the main office. We launched our PS 1 Website last November. Additional information regarding school calendar, school expectations and policies are uploaded onto the website. The information is translated into Chinese and Spanish. - Permission slips for programming with community partners - Grade /Classroom Celebrations and invitations for families -Permission slips including legal contracts for trips and media coverage September 2018 to June 2019 The teachers will provide an electronic copy of the English version to the translators at least 2 weeks prior to the deadline. The translators will use before or after school time to translate the materials and send 2018-19 CEP 78  -Monthly Parent Calendars -Translations of monthly School Leadership Team minutes/agendas -Letters from Teachers to welcome and end year Event Calendars and year round calendars PTA language interpreter and translated notices for monthly meetings Bi-yearly Community Learning School updates - Fall/Spring November 2018 and April 2019 back to the teachers for copying or distribution to families. The translated materials are provided to every family so that they are well informed of school and classroom events and policies by backpacking it home with the students. In addition we strategically placed three bulletin boards that display the same translated information, one outside the main office, second one outside the PTA family room, and third outside the lunchroom where families drop off and pick up students. Additional handouts are shared during school leadership team and general PTA meetings. Families are also able to pick up extra hard copies of all materials in the main office. The teachers will provide an electronic copy of the English version to the translators at least 2 weeks prior to the deadline. The translators will use before or after school time to translate the materials and send back to the teachers for copying or distribution to families. The translated materials are provided to every family so that they are well informed of school and classroom events and policies by backpacking it home with the students. In addition we strategically placed three bulletin boards that display the 2018-19 CEP 79  same translated information, one outside the main office, second one outside the PTA family room, and third outside the lunchroom where families drop off and pick up students. Additional handouts are shared during school leadership team and general PTA meetings. Families are also able to pick up extra hard copies of all materials in the main office. The teachers will provide an electronic copy of the English version to the translators at least 2 weeks prior to the deadline. The translators will use before or after school time to translate the materials and send back to the teachers for copying or distribution to families. -IEP goals and behavioral letter and anecdotal - and as needed September 2018 to June 2019 The translated materials are provided to applicable families so that they are well informed of their student's learning. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Open School Curriculum Evening We also use the family engagement time every Tuesday to reach out informally to parents and guardians to follow up with curriculum and children's progress supports. Overall conversations with parents are ongoing. Parents expect to be able to speak with classroom teachers before September Before the end of school year in June, all families receive a September calendar of events. provide interpretation service(s)? We compensate the bilingual paras and school aides, use our parent coordinator, and outreach to our Chinese speaking organizations for volunteers. We also provide information for staff to contact the Language Line to assist with oral translations. 2018-19 CEP 80  and after school. Issues with attendance teachers and guidance counselors reaching out to parents are continuous and frequent pending need basis. Our formal face to face meetings include 2- parent teachers conferences (November and March) and 2- Family Engagement Nights (October and May). We also have parent orientations in September, ELL Parent Workshops in September October and November, and Middle School Choice Workshops for Grade 5 & are open to Grade 4 Parents. September and October reminders and monthly calendars reminders Monthly Calendars and signs to post events. Online posting on school website Also evening celebrations from Grade 5 Ballroom Dance Competitions and Family Dinner Party, Grade 3 National Dance Institute, and events with Young People's Chorus in grades 2-5. Monthly calendars, parents' newsletters and special invitations. Online post on school website We compensate the bilingual paras and school aides, use our parent coordinator, and outreach to our Chinese speaking organizations for volunteers. We also provide information for staff to contact the Language Line to assist with oral translations. We compensate the bilingual paras and school aides, use our parent coordinator, and outreach to our Chinese speaking organizations for volunteers. We also provide information for staff to contact the Language Line to assist with oral translations. We compensate the bilingual paras and school aides, use our parent coordinator, and outreach to our Chinese speaking organizations for volunteers. We also provide information for staff to contact the Language Line to assist with oral translations. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, all parents have been informed if the building had to be evacuated there will be a posting (translated in English, Spanish and Chinese) on the school door to indicate the evacuation sites. In addition parents that speak a second language have been invited to a "WECHAT" address that is navigated by the bilingual school aide. We also remind all families to register for NOTIFY NYC app. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 81  On the first day of professional development the ENL coordinator and team members will present CR A-663 to the staff and provide every staff member a copy of the regulation. SLT members will continue to share the CR A-663 after initial meeting. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have posted the Chancellor’s Regulations, “Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities” in 9 languages on the PTA Family Room bulletin board, P.S. 1 community news bulletin boards, and places that are conspicuous and where there is a high volume of parent engagement (i.e, pick up and dismissal areas). Extra copies of regulations are available in the PTA room and school main office. Also our main office maintains appropriate and current updated records of primary language of each parent on ATS. In the beginning of the year, we inform new and returning parents during PTA and Parent Orientation meetings that oral translations are available for all school home communication needs. For parent workshops and meetings, we ask parents to complete a tear off to identify language identify their preferred language in advance so we can have the translators readily available. We also notify the parents that the DOE may provide translation and interpretation services beyond those outlined in CRA-663. Additionally we notify the parents that when it comes to student progress and conduct, the interpreters they choose to bring must be 18 years old or older. Finally we note to the parents that DOE will have interpreters at Citywide meetings including Panel for Educational Policy Meetings, Citywide ELL parent meetings, Citywide/Community , and Education Council Meetings. Included in our safety plan we provide parents in need of language access services procedures to ensure that they have full access to the schools administrative offices. Notices and evacuation materials are all translated into the needs languages. Sign in procedures are in place for parents as they enter the building with the security. The Parent Coordinator is readily available via by phone for oral interpretation (her phone number is posted on the bulletin board at the front door entrance) . Her office hours to address any concerns about the school’s translation and interpretation services are also posted. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As a New York City Community Learning School in partnership with the UFT and APEX for Youth, we have requested and issued two parent surveys a year. This is in addition to the NYC School Survey. The surveys that come from PS 1 are related to workshops and parent engagement. We also receive input from our PTA Executive Board and School Leadership Team members. In addition after every parent workshop we ask the participants to complete a reflection sheet. In all cases we revise workshops, protocols and systems to provide better quality and availability of services to our parents. 2018-19 CEP 82 
