2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M007 School Name: P.S. 007 SAMUEL STERN Principal: CHRISTINE VANZETTA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS/MS 007 Samuel Stern 04M007 310400010007 3K-8 School Number (DBN): 160 E. 120 th Street, New York, NY 10035 212-860-5827 212-860-6070 Phone Number: Fax: Christine VanZetta cvanzet@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Christine VanZetta Rafael Argudo Maina Melendez Rafael Argudo/MainaMelendez TBD N/A N/A Rosa Marruffo - Edible Schoolyard andIsidora Echeverria/Denise Goodman -Hunter College CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 04 Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 E. 120 th Street, New York, NY 10035 Superintendent’s Office Address: Aestrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th Floor ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Christine VanZetta Rafael Argudo MainaMelendez MirtaSantos N/A N/A RosaMaruffo Denise Goodman Cameron Maxwell Emily Walsh *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) ProgramManager, Edible Schoolyard Hunter College UFT Member UFT Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Hannah van der Swaagh Ivelisse Medina Ysabel Batista Chelsea Morales Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) UFT Member UFT Member Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Our vision is to create, develop and nurture an academic and emotionally supportive environment that prepares all students from Pre-K to 8th grade for the highest level of achievement in high school, college and careers aligned to their own personal goals. 2018-19 CEP 9  Mission Statement: PS/MS 007 strives to create a collaborative culture amongst all stakeholders to ensure a rigorous academic and extra-curricular experience that engages all learners through inquiry, design and project based work. We strive to engage the whole child by creating an arts program that can foster curiosities necessary for scholars to develop a sense of their place in the world by engaging in work that challenges them with real-life situations and the opportunity for reflections. Instructional Focus: If all teachers consistently use formative and summative assessment data to design and adjust instruction to meet the needs of all learners in all content areas, then we will increase student access to the curricula, strengthen student cognitive engagement, and improve student outcomes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 007 Samuel Stern is a grade 3K-8 school located in East Harlem serving approximately 424 students. Our school register of students includes the following demographics: 62% Hispanic, 29% Black, and 3.5% Asian and 2% Caucasian. 26% of our students are Students with Disabilities, 9% of our students are English Language Learners (ELLs); 34% of our students are in temporary housing; and 73% of our families are eligible for House Rent Allowance, HRA. It is our belief that the present economic realities of our students should not determine their level of academic opportunities or their accomplishments in the future. For that reason, we partner with Hunter College to provide rigorous arts and sciences programming for our students from 3K to 8th grade with programs that will include classical violin training in which every student is expected to learn to play a musical instrument along with a deep exploration of science and its role in college and career readiness In 2nd grade students have weekly, all year swimming lessons at Asphalt Green so that in the next 5 years all students above 1st grade will be proficient deep water swimmers upon completion of their Waterproofing Program. In partnership with Edible Schoolyard, we aim to transform the hearts, minds and eating habits of our students through garden and kitchen classes integrated into the school day. The goal is that students will learn to make healthy food choices for themselves, their communities, their environment and create a just and sustainable food system for all. This is the springboard for the development of a comprehensive S.T.E.A.M (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) program that will be a model for New York City. Our faculty and partners work side by side to develop a rigorous educational experience for students that take place at our building and throughout the city. We created a series of Extended Day/Extended Year programs that allow for students from kindergarten to 8th grade to participate in activities that support their academic learning and ignite and support their passion. The I Have a Dream foundation established a cohort of students in a long-term program of academic support, mentoring, enrichment and tuition assistance for higher education. Seventy students from 6th to 8th grades are in this extended day and extended year system. Ninety students receive tutoring, enrichment and sport activities with the Union Settlement organizations. Forty of our students in grades 2 thorough 5 are involved in the Extended School Day/School Violence Prevention after school program. Our students in kindergarten - 2nd grade attend extended day enrichment and fun activities at the YMCA at PS 96. As a faculty we have dedicated ourselves to creating a learning community that encourages risks, seeks improvement, and utilizes strategies that reach all learners. We believe that a great school community is based on the ability of all teachers to contribute to the learning of the community. This year, four teachers were selected to be part of the Teacher Leadership Program, TLP. These teachers form the instructional cabinet and will be a huge part of developing the instructional goal setting and will work with all teachers to align their classroom goals with the school and district vision for student achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our special populations include Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, and students in need of intervention and at-risk support. We also have 34% Students in temporary housing, and 73% of our families are eligible for House Rent Allowance, HRA. In order for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners to access the curriculum and demonstrate growth, these students need explicit, direct instruction, along with frequent modeling and visual support. Some of our Students with Disabilities also require additional adult support, which we provide during Integrated Co-Teaching classes, in self-contained classes, and through the implementation of paraprofessional services. Several of our Students with Disabilities require related services, all of which are provided within the school building. In addition to being supported daily within the classroom by our classroom teachers and ENL staff, our English Language Learners will be invited to attend after school ENL programs as well as Saturday ENL programs. To support our students in need of intervention and at-risk support, for both academics and behavior, we utilize formative and summative assessment data to identify the students. We will hold weekly Child Study Team meetings and weekly RULER/PBIS Tier II/III meetings to identify students in need. After identification, we provide the students with small group Academic Intervention Services, at-risk counseling, and social emotional support as needed. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As identified by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 007 has shown positive growth in delivering rigorous instruction as a direct result of improved collaboration among teachers. Moving into SY 2018-19, the administration and staff seek to continue this positive trend by strengthening the protocols used to look at student work when teachers work together to identify learner centered problems and our own problems practice. This cycle of inquiry can only be effective if there is strong leadership to develop systems and structures for collaborative, student focused teacher work. Thus, key areas of focus for us this year are effective leadership, rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers. These elements of the framework live and breathe in the Danielson Framework For Teaching in 1E, 3B, 3C, and 3D. Through a deep administrative focus on using meaningful and effective feedback to drive instruction and using data from common assessment to analyze student growth, our staff will work together to monitor our own practices as they relate to student learning. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M007 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 357 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 26 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.1% % Reduced Lunch 13.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 65.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 90 88 89.1% 0.6% 26.6% 27.5% 2.8% 1.7% 0 13% 5.8 27.7% 74% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the school enters the 2018-2019 school year, it is undergoing deep content area data analysis to identify preliminary areas of focus for teacher work. Utilizing the June 2018 Instructional Report, we find that our middle school students struggle with both English Language Arts and Mathematics. Specifically, our students struggle most with using text features to decode complex text and with both fraction and ratio and proportion work; both critical real-world skill sets. In order to target these deficit areas and dig deeper into the learner centered problem, we will develop common assessment practice across all grades so we can isolate the specific standards where students struggle and target remediation effectively. To date the school does not have a mechanism for recording, tracking and deliberating over student work. What the school does very well, however, is we have a collaborative staff, that with the proper systems and leadership structures to drive inquiry, will become adept at creating cycles of looking at student work to improve teacher work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students in all grades and all subject areas will improve their ability to decode complex texts and be able to utilize mathematical language to access comprehension and computational skills that are out of reach because of a lack of academic vocabulary. This growth will be measured by i-Ready benchmark assessment, interim unit assessments and the NYS ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 13 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will have access to direct vocabulary instruction aimed at building reading comprehension and ultimately better quality writing skills. September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Teacher Leaders, Consultants from Teaching Matters Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Common Assessment Mechanism PS/MS 007 will implement the use of i-Ready to set baselines, measure interim growth and to predict summative success. PS/MS 007 will work to strengthen the Instructional Core in all subjects and in all grades. The focus will be on Academic Vocabulary and teachers will be trained in the research and implementation of Academic Vocabulary as a tool for increased reading comprehension in all subjects. This will impact the quantity of student word acquisition, student verbal skills and ultimately the volume and quality of student writing. Student performance on grade level tests will improve due their increased reading comprehension in all subjects. The Continuing Learning Program will be in 2 cycles: Cycle 1- Professional Learning on language acquisition of academic vocabulary: Session 1 - Framing the work - Article study - Principal will lead article study that highlights the recent research on vocabulary acquisition. Session 2 - Intro to Vocabulary Strategies - Lead teachers will train teachers on several high-impact strategies and teachers will acquire a toolbox of strategies to positively impact student learning. Session 3 - Intro to Key Academic Vocabulary - Lead teachers will identify words by Tier levels and train teachers to the specialized words that have the highest impact on student comprehension in all subjects. 2018-19 CEP 14  Session 4 - Looking at Student Work - Formative Assessment Strategies - Teacher leaders will conduct professional development using several protocols that allow teachers to assess the impact of academic vocabulary training on student work Session 5 - Looking at Student Work - Formative Assessment Analysis in the Math classroom - Teachers will be trained on the impact of academic vocabulary training on student ability to understand and solve of word problems.. Week 6 - Looking at Student Work - Formative Assessment Strategies in the ELA classroom. Lead teachers will work with grade bands to identify texts rich in Big Ideas as part of a unit of study that includes pictures, fiction text, non-fiction text and videos. Students experience words in context and be able to identify the different meanings of specialized words in specific disciplines. This focus on Tier 2 words will result in increased volume and quality of writing during the school year and an increase in the number of students performing on grade level on the State Tests. Teachers will be trained on identifying the Tier 2 vocabulary words that needed to be explicitly taught in each lesson. Data Collection and Monitoring:    Faculty to collect student data in a systematic manner. Faculty to understand and analyze data and form action plans for students in various subgroups. Leverage intervisitations to develop skill sets for students that need support.  Utilizing online database to store student work so that peer evaluations of work can be done. Specialists to train and work with various subgroups.  3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Teachers, Data Specialist How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Target Groups: Parents, guardians and other family members Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel: Administration, Parent Coordinator, classroom teachers, school-based organizations {Edible Schoolyard, Union Steelement, I Have a Dream, Extended School Day/School Violence Prevention (ESDSVP)} 2018-19 CEP 15  Parent involvement in the process: Invite parents to visit classrooms to celebrate cumulative writing projects. Initiate book clubs and workshops for parents about the priority of writing Leverage parent coordinator expertise and training so that they can turnkey information to families.  Assist schools to formulate parent specific workshops on how to support their child with writing at home     Gather feedback from the SLT which will help to refine and direct the process  Delivery of parent workshops will be used to involve parents in the process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to implement a robust language acquisition program that will impact student writing skills the following instructional resources and partnerships will be utilized: -Model Teachers -Instructional Support from District 4 -Partnership with Hunter College - Instructional Coach Laurie Rabinowitz -Inter-visitations (Danielson Triads) -Small group reading instruction Additionally, instructional materials will be purchased to support implementation of the action plan, including: iPads & MacBook Pro   Rally test books  Online learning software Teacher per session will be utilized to support the planning of professional learning cycles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor progress towards increased volume and quality of student writing there will be 2 Interim Assessments that will measure the level of reading comprehension on multiple choice questions in ELA and on word problems and extended answers in Math. In January 2018, students will complete Ready ELA and math practice assessments. Teachers will complete item analysis by whole class and by individual students to determine the areas for re-teaching as well as the need for additional instructional time for groups of students. 2018-19 CEP 16  In March 2019, students will complete a second Ready ELA and math practice assessment.and teachers will get a second opportunity to analyze data, look for patterns and trends, and adjust instruction to maximize student outcomes Growth will be measured by the difference in performance between the two Interim Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim Assessments using Ready ELA and math practice assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On the 2017-18 NYC School Survey, 87% of students said that they felt safe in their classes. However, our school has struggled with establishing a respectful classroom and school culture. 42% of students say that most students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions, 48% of students say that most students follow the rules in class, and only 33% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. In order to establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers, we need to create a shared set of schoolwide expecations for all school community members. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of staff and students will participate in implementing Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) and RULER (an an acronym that stands for the five skills of emotional intelligence). Students will have increased motivation to follow school rules and expectations, and will receive appropriate supports to be successful. This will result in a reduction of 10% in principal and superintendent suspensions. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Intervention Strategies:  Students with Individual Education Plans will be supported with flexible/strategy groupings, Response to Intervention RTI, and Universal Design for Learning, UDL,  High Achieving students will have access to High School regents classes and afterschool academic clubs  All students in middle school will have 1 period/day of  writing lab that target reading and writing. Students in the lowest third in 2nd. grade will have a pull-out reading program for individual instruction via Reading Partners.  English Language learners, ELLs, will have a literacy program "Photo & Me" that targets English language acquisition.  Middle School Quality Initiative will support all students with academic vocabulary acquisition via WordGen and reading and writing complex tasks. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, Students with disabilities, September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Reading Consultants High achieving students, ELLs, Social/Emotional Supports: All students  Guidance counseling School psychologist   Awards Assemblies  Honor Roll College and Career Readiness:  High school application parent workshops   Union Settlement High School Application Program Individual High School Admissions Counseling 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Teachers. Guidance Counselor, Principal, Teachers 8th graders and their families, all students September 2018 - December 2018 for 8th graders and all year for 7th graders. 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Target Groups: All Students Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel: Community Based Organizations, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, Attendance Volunteer, Attendance Teacher School/Community Partnerships and their impact on Parent Engagement: Parents will be actively invited into the school to participate in various community activities throughout the year. The Attendance Team will lead workshops on Managing Attendance for Students with Asthma. The Parent Coordinator will organize workshops on Child Rearing, Anti-Bullying, and English for School Survival. Edible Schoolyard will have a 5 session training program on healthy eating and healthy cooking where students and parents will cook and eat dinner together. The following partners will participate in several parent outreach projects that enhance parent engagement: I have a Dream - 6-8th graders after school and summer program Union Settlement - 6-8th graders after school program YMCA - K-4 after school program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to provide a supportive environment we will fund per session for teachers, provide time for small group instruction, common planning time and Professional Development. Instructional resources include Teacher's College curriculum, leveled libraries, curriculum maps, curriculum guides, and online learning supports. Resources for extended day programs include access to software through IXL, Study Island and management and repairs of Mac computers and iPads that students use to complete homework and practice skills with our partners Union Settlement and I Have A Dream. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 at least 80% of students surveyed should be able to explain what our PBIS Matrix is, Identify and explain three schoolwide expectations, identify who our school mascot is, and begin to demonstrate how to use the RULER Mood Meter to recognize and understand his or her own emotions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 20  Student data including students adhering to the schoolwide uniform policy, schoolwide cell phone policy, lunch and after-school detention/intervention data, tallies of classes earning School Bucks to redeem for class rewards, 100% attendance data and overall school attendance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS/MS 007 we believe that if we can unify around a few targeted objectives we can improve student achievement. For the 2018-2019 school year we want to study and improve our own practice of teaching writing by focusing on the ways students acquire and use academic vocabulary. We realize that ELA teachers cannot teach writing in isolation, in other words, we must teach writing and content within all subject areas. To do so we must refine our planning process, improve the protocols that guide our work, and have structures and schedules in place for teachers to work together during the school day. Currently, we utilize online structures such as Google Drive and Mastery Connect to share local practices. Weekly meetings occur on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. Grade level teams meet at least weekly to discuss ongoing patterns and trends in student data. Vertical teams meet during Monday PD to discuss gaps and strengths in curricula and student learning. We seek to improve the collaborative approach by narrowing our focus on research-based article studies, norming expectations for student work, and having high expectations on student achievement. All teachers understand the interconnections of academic vocabulary, speaking and writing; and work strategically with each other, regardless of grade level, to provide cohesive curricula experiences for students that are rich and dynamic. Throughout the year we focus on: -Teaming strategies for academic vocabulary acquisition -Curricula refinement -Analyzing student writing -Sharing practices through web applications -Using intervisitations as a learning tool Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. PS/MS 007 Samuel Stern will work with the Teacher Leadership Program to utilize the tenets of Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to allow teacher leadership teams to implement the instructional goals for the school. This will increase teacher capacity to critically look at student work; identify student confusions and gaps in learning based on 2018-19 CEP 22  student work data; and develop follow-up action plans to address these confusions and gaps. Increased teacher collaboration will cause student proficiency on the NY State Math and ELA tests to increase 20 percentage points by June 2019 as compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, teacher leaders, staff developers and educational consultants. October 2018 - December 2018 Mid year reflection in January 2019 Subsequent cycles Feb 2019 -April 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, teacher teams and teacher leaders Professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Create Professional Learning Cycle (8 weeks): Teacher Teams by grade, subject and cohort.  Read relevant academic articles.  Discuss strategies and align with student work.  Create and administer normative assessments based on student needs and aligned to the Common Core standards.  Reflect on data in teacher teams and plan reteaching strategies using student work protocols Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Assessment data will be disaggregated to allow for targeted instruction to lowest third, Students with disabilities and ELLs. Students will have access to Online resources that facilitates independent learning and allow them to set and achieve personalized goals.   Providing optional Instruction on Saturdays and Holidays Students performing in the lowest third, students with disabilities, high need student subgroups and high performing students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Target Groups: Parents, guardians and other family members. Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel: Principal, parent coordinator, teachers Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: Informing PTA of the work of the PLCs and inviting participation at guest speaker events.   Giving parents access to the cycle schedule and communicating directly with them about the data analysis and re-teaching schedules.  Providing parents with Online access to student data and support strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To support the work of the PLCs it will be necessary to provide extensive PD and common planning time in the schedule. Teachers will meet weekly in cohorts and grade teams supported by per session funding. iReady will be used to help personalize instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 all teachers will use online systems to share best practices. Across student notebooks common approaches to teaching writing will be visible. By February 2019 teachers will be proficient at working in PLCs and have extensive data on their student learning gaps and confusions. Re-teaching will result in 15% improvement by February and 20% improvement on the State ELA and Math test by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Logs in Math and Writing Logs in ELA will be used daily to monitor student learning after each lesson. Unit tests will be used to assess students' deeper understanding and ability to recall and apply content to real-life problems. Interim Assessments will be used to measure progress towards Common Core Standards. Finally, we will examine the percentage of students gaining a level 3 or 4 on the ELA NY State Test for 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Results on the 2018 NY State Test indicate that 23% of all students are on grade level in math and 38% in ELA. In the past, teachers have not consistently monitored student achievement throughout the school year and refined unit and lesson plans when major deficits were identified. Students have been unable to monitor their achievement on specific standards using city-wide assessments, and will learn how to use self-assessment tools to Check for Understanding. Teachers will use authentic Interim Assessments using CCLS-aligned Ready math and ELA practice assessments to set goals and plan for re-teaching. School leadership will provide Professional Learning on formative and summative data collection, Data Inquiry Team protocols, and protocols such as the Tuning Protocol to help revisit and redesign lesson plans for reteaching. Teachers will utilize data of sub-groups within the school and across all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At least 95% of students in 3-8th grade will participate in two Interim Assessments in Math and ELA. Teachers will use the student data from these assessments to identify gaps and student confusions and to refine unit and lesson plans to target the academic needs of each child and increase performance of students performing on or above grade level by 20% in ELA and math by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be trained on the rationale and strategies for best practices for Interim Assessments using iReady and Ready for timely delivery of data. All teachers September 2018 - November 2019 Teaching Matters Consultant, Reading Consultant from District, Principal, AP Teachers will work in teacher teams to analyze student item analysis data by sub-groups and individual students. Teachers and service providers will increase the frequency of direct/explicit instruction, teach self-regulation and strategies such as self-questioning, and close reading with challenging texts to students identified in the lowest third on each Interim Assessment.. All teachers December 2018 - April 2019 Teachers teams, staff developers, Principal and AP All teachers/ SETSS teacher September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers & Service providers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Target Groups: Parents, guardians and other family members. Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel: Principal, parent coordinator, teachers ● Schedule parent monthly meetings on relevant topics that promote parent leadership skills with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Funding will be used to purchase iReady online program and Ready ELA and math practice assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In December 2018, and again in March 2019, all students will be given an Interim Assessment that uses the city-wide Fall and Spring Benchmarks that closely reflect the length and complexity of the NY State test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluation of the 2018 Instructional Report should show a 20% average shift relative to the city in both Multiple choice and constructed responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 School Survey indicates that 93% of our families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. 95% of our families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. However, only 81% of our families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and staff will hold at least two workshops per grade band (Pk-2, 3-5, and 6-8) to inform parents of the grade-level expectations in content-specific curriculum (ELA, math, science, and social studies) and communicate with families about how they can help their child(ren) learn at home, as evidenced by school calendars, sign-in sheets and agendas. This will result in an increase of at least 5% (from 81% to a minimum of 86%) of parents indicating that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child(ren) learn. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The parent coordinator will survey parents to gain insights into their interests and needs. Each month a parent involvement activity will be planned based on the result of the survey. Parents Parent Coordinator October 2018 - June 2019 Parents will be offered a minimum of two workshops per grade, facilitated by teachers, support staff, and/or the Parent Coordinator. Parents and students October 2018 - June 2019 PTA members, partner organizations, SLT Parents will celebrate the achievement of their children with musical concerts, dance performances, tastings, swim meets, games, publishing parties and graduations. Parents, students and CBOs/Partnerships. October 2018 - June 2019 Music teacher, NDI, Edible schoolyard, Asphalt Green, coaches, teachers and principal Student-led parent conferences will be designed to increase parent interest and participation. Parents and students May 2019 Teachers and students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hunter College - Whole School Asphalt Green I have a Dream - 3-6th graders after school and summer program Union Settlement - 6-8th graders after school program YMCA - K-4 after school program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 30  Funding will be provided to support per session for teacher participation in extended day events. Space for planning and printing resources will be made available to support the monthly parent involvement activities. Funding for snacks and drinks will be made available so parents feel welcomed and celebrated when they attend school events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 parent attendance data will be re-evaluated and a parent survey will be conducted to re-calibrate parent interest. Monthly parent activities will reflect parent interests and result in 50% increase in attendance due to improved satisfaction with workshops and activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey, Sign-in sheets, head count at school events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -LLI -One-to-One -During day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -DRP -Running Records -Just Words -Small Group -On-Demand Writing -Great Leaps -Site Word Recognition -Fundations -Guided Reading -Concepts of Print Mathematics Science -Letter Sound ID -State Test Score -Formativeand Summativeassessment data (Exit Tickets, End of unit assessments) -Class Unit Exams -Khan Academy -One-to-One -During day -Small Group -Guided notes -One-to-One -During school day -Performance-based assessments -Lab report templates -Small Group -After-school -Lab performance Social Studies -Same as ELA At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Based on previous year’s number of referrals and/or incidents. -Close Reading strategies -Same as ELA -PBIS -One-to-One -During day -Small Group -Small Group -During day -In school intervention -One-to-One -After-school 2018-19 CEP 32  -Behavior or conduct sheet -Modified behaviorplan 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will be given access to the following: 1. Increased socio-emotional support from the Social Worker 87 students 2. Uniform assistance 3. Help with school supplies and books 4. Funding for trips 5. Tutoring as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff members, currently, are considered highly qualified. We will continue to attract highly qualified teachers through: ● our HR recruiter ● partnership with local universities and Hunter College ● PS/MS 7 works closely with the New York City Department of Education ● Fellows Program to attract highly qualified teachers to our school. Potential candidates are invited in for an interview with the hiring team, and asked to our school to conduct a demonstration lesson. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS/MS 7 utilizes the mentoring program to provide training and support to new teachers and guides them towards their certification needs. Professional workshops are offered during and after school at Monday PD and via Online Courses with Stanford University.. The UFT Chapter chairperson at PS/MS 7 provides information and literature regarding UFT course offerings that will satisfy licensing and certification requirements for our new teachers. Our PE teacher has professional development with PE Works through our Focus School status; Music teacher has PD with Arts Matter; PreK teachers are trained by the PreK For All initiative; Middle School teachers work with the Consultant from Middle School Quality Initiative, MSQI; the 2nd Grade teachers work with the consultant from East Harlem Reads from Hunter College and they receive training on Leveled Literacy Intervention by the Literacy Coach; all teachers have PD and individual coaching sessions with Teaching Matters consultant, Jen Gleason. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 36  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We maintain the standards of the Early Childhood tenets by working with the office of Early Childhood with the NYC Department of Education. In particular, both of our pre-school teachers work with a counselor year long to provide families with the best choices throughout the course of the year. In addition, teachers participate in the DOE Work Sampling program. This allows teachers to analyze student work, modify curriculum, and maintain the integrity of the ECERS-R evaluation. PreK teachers are an integral part of the whole school Monday PD which is focused on academic vocabulary during this Inquiry Cycle. They are held to the same high standards of Academic Rigor as the rest of the school. In fact, many of the examples for language acquisition during Monday PD use PreK examples to demonstrate that all students are subject to high academic expectations. Paraprofessional staff in Pre-K attend professional development with their classroom teacher at the Office of Early Childhood and through site visitations. The first PD focused on analyzing and using data and the second will give strategies to promote positive behavior in the Pre-K classroom. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All staff members are included in decision-making regarding assessments to use. As a committee staff received PD on various assessments that may capture the best data to base instructional decisions from meetings in June of 2018. Staff made selections that they felt were best for their use so that all students may learn from. The decision making process is as follows: Introduction to various assessments 1. 2. Professional Development regarding assessments 3. Meeting to discuss pros and cons of all assessments 4. Meeting with question, “What assessments will provide us (the staff) with the most accurate data so that we can create plans to best support the needs of our students? 5. Partner with families to explain all assessment choices and invite them to ask questions. 6. Select final assessments 2018-19 CEP 37  7. Receive on-going PL from coaches and network personnel in terms of next steps with data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4, 5a, 5b, 5c 4, 5a, 5b, 5c 4, 5a, 5b, 5c 4, 5a, 5b, 5c x x x x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 205,387.00 36,802.00 11,200.00 0 2,225,912.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 38   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Samuel Stern PS/MS 007, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children.Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community, Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Samuel Stern PS/MS 007 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand. Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 40  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was re-designed based upon the historic low attendance of parents at school events and the percent of parents who stated they did not feel welcomed into the school. The parent coordinator and members of the PTA will conduct an annual survey of the impact of the parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The following plans will be followed: ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills. ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, and Parent-Teacher Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills. ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Schedule additional parent monthly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year. ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Teacher Association; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events. ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers. ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress. ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 41  School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 007 Samuel Stern , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Action (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the Comprehensive Educational Plan. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents during the beginning of the year survey; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities the serve to increase parent participation; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title 111 After School Program of 04M007 is to provide standards-based and data-driven supplemental program for English as a New Language Learners using English as language of instruction. The after school program will support the ELLs meeting NYS and city performance standards for ELA and mathematics and also provide support in making significant gains in NYSESLAT. A total of 40 ELLS from 2 - 8 grade will participate in the after-school program. The program will cover the subjects of ELL Vocabulary, Reading and Writing. This program will be taught by one ENL teacher and three content area teachers. The language of instruction will be English. The ENL teacher will co-teach with ELL Vocabulary & Reading and ELL Reading and Writing sessions; in addition, the ENL and the math teachers will co-teach Math session using Guided Math Reading and other ENL methodologies. The 04M007 ELL After School Program is a 22-week program with a total of 2 hours per week during November 2018- March 2019. ELL students will be grouped based in their 2018 NYSESLAT Scores: Grouping for Instruction Grades 2-4 (5 TR, 4 EX) Grades 5-6 (2 TR, 7 EX) Grades 7-8 (1 TR, 10 EX) Grade 6-8 Newcomers (2 EN, 4 EM) Schedule: Thursdays: 2:30pm-4:30pm Flow of the Day (Subject to Change) Book Club Critics Readers, Thinkers and Young Authors include: 1. Phonics 2. Fluency and Motivation in Reading 3. Vocabulary Development and word analysis 4. Spelling Skills/Number Sense/Math Concepts 5. Comprehension Strategies/Mathematical understanding and word story analysis 6. Writing Skills and Motivation to Write in ELA/Math/Science 7. Writing Conventions 8. Literary Response and Analysis Session Themes (Intervals of 4-8 days) Session 1-Visual Arts (art history and East Harlem, painting and technique, photography) Session 2-Book Making (create math concept maps, math art around the world, and math glossaries) Session 3- Broadcasting (interviews, create questionnaires) Session 4-Performing Arts (Reader's Theater, Improvisation, Poetry Slam Session 5-Book Clubs -Nonfiction Reading Exploration Projects 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Session 6-Music Session 7-Science and Gardening Appropriate materials for Vocabulary Development, Reading, Writing and Math Workbooks will be purchased for this Title 111 After School Program as described below: A) Language Power; Teacher Created Materials Publishing B) General supplies such as copy papers, pens, markers, pencils post-its, loose leaf, dry erase pens and poster boards. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The SIOP Model will be introduced to all teachers of ELLs. Using the best-selling research-based book Making Content Comprehensible for English Learners: The SIOP Model, teachers will gain practical skills to collaborate, share, and plan lessons that use all eight components and thirty features of SIOP in order to teach content while developing ELLs' academic and social language. ELL students will be grouped 1-2, 3-4, 5-6. 7-8. With the exception of 2nd Grade, the after school program model will support language acquisition through the arts with the following arts components: visual arts (painting, art history, street murals), the performing arts (reader's theater, improvisational theater, playwriting, dance, video production, and audio visual work) and music (songs, poetry/spoken word, parent voice/cultural relevance) and broadcasting (news, questionnaires and interviews). Professional Development will be on-going during Monday and/or Tuesday Professional Learning sessions, and will be provided by Janelle Fiori. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 47  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: New information and supplemental academic resources given to parents help to support language acquisition at home. Parents of ELLs will be invited to participate in 3 separate workshops that will impact faster acquisition and deeper understanding of English which will impact higher achievement for ELLs on the NYS Tests. Letters of invitation in English, Spanish and Arabic will be sent home to the parents of ELLs regarding the workshops. The ENL teacher and the parents coordinator will facilitate these workshops that will be held in the library at PS/MS 007. Session 1: Develop Academic Language at Home. Supporting ELLs with a focus on Reading Comprehension. Parents will be introduced to various ways they can read with their child to support thinking, questioning, accountable talk, summarizing, synthesizing, and drawing conclusions. Specific work with vocabulary will also be highlighted. Parents will partner with their children to engage in reading activities. November 29, 2018 2:20 - 3-20 PM Session 2, Preparing ELLs to Tackle Word Problems in Mathematics. A focus on how to read word problems by playing Math games with their children. January 24, 2019 2:20 - 3-20 PM Session 3: Supporting ELLs in Science - Meeting the 8th grade challenge. Parents will be given an overview of the 8th grade Science curriculum and participate in a Science mini-project. March 8, 2019 2:20 - 3:20 PM Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) -  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. - Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. - - Supplies and materials 2018-19 CEP 48 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. -  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL - - - - - - - - N/A^^ 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name PS/MS 007 Samuel Stern School Borough Manhattan School Number 007 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal David Graeber Coach Martha Gutierrez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Monica Lehmann-Gonzalez Teacher/Subject Area M. Heldt Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Superintendent A. Estrella Assistant Principal NA Coach Martha Gutierrez School Counselor Daughn Lee Parent Desiree Graham Parent Coordinator M. Abraham Field Support Center Staff Member F. Castro Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 371 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.48%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 2 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A 9 N/A 10 N/A 11 N/A 12 N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the literacy skills of English Language Learners/Multilingual Language Learners in grades K-8, we use a variety of formative assessments. We conduct TCRWP running records four times a year (September-October, December-January, February-March, and June). In grades K-2, Fundations assessments are used throughout the year. For grades K-5, IReady literacy and mathematics are used as well. Teachers also use the data to target each students' areas of strengths and needs for improvement. The MOSL assessments, Mastery Connect k-8 , Khan Academy (6-8), and Study island (6-8) online programs for assessments and instruction are also used throughout various grades to assess students and plan for targeted small and whole group instruction . The ENL teacher administers the ELL Periodic Assessment twice a year to all MLLs. A variety of informal assessments used by our teachers but two commonly used informal assessments are the Performance-Based Assessment and the Student Grade Portfolio. The data shows that most ELLs are below the identified literacy benchmarks for their grade. In order to improve our students’ scores, each teacher with the help of the literacy coach and the ENL teacher develop learning goals for every student. These 2018-19 CEP 51  goals are discussed in grade level meetings and during professional development. The goals are monitored throughout the school year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support our efforts to ensure that both formative assessments and informal assessments are ongoing and completed, the school uses a schedule with specific assessment administration dates and windows of administration time frames, as well as the submission of all tests booklets, answers, and results. For formative assessments given by the state such as Periodic Assessments, MOSLs, and Interim Assessments, the school follows a formal testing schedule that follows the protocol for test administration and IEP testing modifications. The Testing Coordinator along with the Assistant Principal, create the schedule and prepare all testing materials, classroom rosters, and student lists identifying all students with testing modifications and accomodations (IEP and 504). Common preps for all grade levels are programmed so that teachers and support staff can meet for instructional planning weekly. The results of the assessments given are disseminated to teachers and other appropriate staff through monthly school wide meetings. The staff is given both paper copies and electronic copies of the data. Together we analyze this data with the support of the principal and the school's data specialist. For the 2017-2018 school year, PS007 will provide a 5 part PD series with the data specialist to analyze the data. The staff and the ENL teacher then measures the growth and needs of all students across grade levels for both ELLs and NonELLs. Instructional goals are then created for each grade level for all students and then individually for all ELLs based on their needs and proficiency levels. These goals are then integrated into the teachers' curriculum planning. The ENL teacher also uses the New Language Arts Progressions along with the Targets of Measurements for ELL students to support ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The baseline assessments used are: baseline writing assessments, informal running records, as well as teacher created quizzes and exams. For summative assessments, teachers use end of year baseline assessments and benchmark growths to identify progress and areas of student growth and need. The DRP, NYC Performance Tasks Writing Initiative, student unit tests, Spring MOSLs, and ELL Periodic assessments are also used to identify student progress, inform best teaching practices, teacher curriculum and targeted teaching instructional groups. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is completed, the teachers create intervention groups targeted to meet specific student needs in order to support student academic improvement and success and reduce failure. The groups are given goals to reach by the end of a 6-8 week cycle. Teacher lessons are designed to offer students both scaffolding and differentiation methods. ICT rooms with two teachers will collaboratively create these new groups, assigning each other with their specific groups. The teachers meet with the Assistant Principal, Principal, and the grade leaders to discuss student progress. The school social worker and all necessary special service teachers such as Speech, ENL, and SETTs teachers are also informed of the new intervention groups and strategies. Each student is given informal and formal assessments to track their academic progress. Weekly meetings are held to update all participating teachers of student progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school develops an assessment calendar at the beginning of the school year. The calendar serves as a system that allows each member of the faculty to capture student data at various points throughout the year. Based on this data the teachers write student goals in literacy specific to academic development in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The specific strategies we develop are with each student in mind. Therefore, tier 1 intervention occurs within the classroom with student specific goals driven by the data. The goals and strategies are also discussed with the ENL teacher. Moreover, we use after school time to serve our students who need even more support. Based on how the students respond after 3-4 weeks to the initial strategies, students are placed in various after-school groups. These groups are: The Photos and Me Program 2018-19 CEP 52  specifically designed for ELLs, Union Settlement, Urban Dove, Extended Day, and the ELL Title III program. Various interventions (reading rescue, guided reading, computer based programs, and others) are used to support the Tier 2 students. Lastly, for Tier 3 we pull out students using the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher's direct communication with the staff leads to the development of strategic goals that are based on student performance data. ELL at-risk students who are identified in grades K-2 as needing academic intervention are serviced by the RTI teachers and within small groups with their homeroom teacher or student teacher. Students get a double-dose of Fundations (decoding/encoding words) 5X a week. The needs of each student is anlayzed to then assist with the grouping of students for reading and mathematics. The materials used for RTI are reading intervention programs with a focus on fluency. ELL strategies are woven into the lessons by providing students with frontloading, comprehensible input, building prior knowledge, providing realia, defining language and content objectives, as well as offer students multiple opportunities to use the new vocabulary. During these sessions, teachers will focus on the four modalities of language learning. All students are given a baseline test at the beginning of the year to provide data on student progress and identify possible students in need of Tier 1, 2, or 3. For Tier I intervention all students receive high-qulaity instruction that is aligned with the core curriculum. Differentiation is considered for all students and intervention is then individualized based on student needs to design a preventative approach to not meeting the standards and a proactive approach towards meetings academic goals. All children are taught withing the classroom in the least restrictive environment. All students are assessed periodically to identify and keep track of student needs, as well as modify instruction and determine how support can continue to be scaffolded. Data is used to not only drive instruction but to determine specific strengths and weaknesses of each child. Classroom lessons are taught as whole group, small group 3-5 students, paired groups, and individually. Teachers model and guide instruction, as well as differentiate and confer with all students. Strategy groups are also created to ensure all learners are able to learn. For Tier 2 intervention, teachers create smaller (3-5 students), more strategic groups that meet with more frequency and intensity, as well as focus in on specific goals and strategies to ensure support for learning. These groups receive more small group frontloading sessions before whole group lessons to provide comprehensible input and improve Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency within the classroom. RTI or AIS provider either integrated services or in or Stand Alone services in small groups (outside of the classroom) abased on student needs. Students meet for 6-8 weeks to provide intense support and meet short term goals discussed by the teacher and the provider. Student are also invited to PS 7s afterschool programs with Union Settlement, Urban Dove, Photos and Me -ELL program, or the ELL Title III program. Students are assessed at the beginning , middle, and end of this cycle. For Tier 3 intervention, based on assessment data and teacher recommendations and the RTI team, students are supported individually and instruction is even more intense. Students meet with the AIS or RTI teacher (trained in RTI models of teaching) five times a week for 30 to 45 minutes for 15-20 weeks. Teachers assess students once or every two weeks or as needed to analyze the rate and level of student performance. The school uses TCRWP running records to assess reading comprehension and levels 4 times a year, Fountas and Pinnell Reading and Writing assessments to assess reading comprehension and reading levels, as well as the Wilson Language Fundations Assessments to assess students' phonemic awareness, phonics skills, vocabulary, and fluency. Teachers also use teacher-created materials designed to assess student understanding and mastery of various lessons and units taught in English Language Arts and Mathematics. For ELLs, Periodic Assessments (2x a year) , the NYSELAT (in the Spring) , and the NYISTELL (upon entering as a new student at the beginning of the year) are also given to students. The school uses all of student data to identify and evaluate student needs and well as to create and differentiate student groupings on all Tier levels. The school then examines the student data to monitor student growth and analyze the needs of students by population and academic and grade levels to then consider teaching practices and curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 53  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments data used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs are the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, Mathematics, Science, MOSLS, and IReady. This data is used to create an ELL program that aides in the instruction for best practices and curriculum development. The data is analyzed by comparing the growth of ELLs and NonELLs from the previous year. The staff then determines the areas of strength and needs for both ELLs and Non ELLs. In order to determine the instructional areas in need of support, the school looks at trends across the grade and proficiency levels. These trends might include specific language acquisition areas such as developing academic vocabulary, fluency, making claims, and making inferences . Teachers and support staff then use these findings to improve ELL growth schoolwide in these targeted areas of needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Through the use of the ELL Data Analysis Tool, the ENL teacher shares important ELL data gathered with teachers and support staff. Goals are created based on the data analyzed. Teachers then update student goals from the previous year in order to support ELLs in their English language academic acquisition and core content knowledge. The results of the assessments given are disseminated to teachers and other appropriate staff through monthly school wide meetings. The staff is given both paper copies and electronic copies of the data. Together the staff analyzes this data with the support of the principal and the school's data specialist. For the 2017-2018 school year, PS007 will provide a 5 part PD series with the data specialist to analyze the data. The staff then measures the growth and needs of all students across grade levels for both ELLs and NonELLs. Instructional goals are then created for each grade level for all students and then individually for all ELLs based on their needs and proficiency levels. The ENL teacher meets with teachers from grades K-8. The teachers then meet during weekly common planning time to discuss student growth, goals, curriculum, best teaching practices for ELLs and share materials such as Rubrics, scaffolds, differentiation, as well as home language support . Teachers also perform an item analysis of test questions to look for patterns in student needs and growth, share information, as well as consider new supports for students. Teachers and administration also meet periodically to discuss classroom programming, student rosters, and support staff assignments. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. ENL instruction is delivered through both Stand Alone and Integrated ENL models. Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 minutes of services or 8 periods a week of ENL instruction, while Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week or 4 periods of service . The levels of these students is determined by the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT. For Commanding students, 90 minutes or 2 periods a week of an integrated model is provided. Students are grouped by ENL and grade level. The ENL teacher holds a dual certification in Elementary Education k-6 common branch and in ENL/TESOL and is therefore able to provide Stand Alone-Integrated services to support the ELA/Math content areas in a separate small group setting. There are both homogeneous and heterogeneous groups in the both the Stand-Alone and Integrated models. All lessons are differentiated to support all learners. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 54  Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes of ENL, the ENL teacher along with the Principal, analyze the needs of ELLs and schedule the ENL program according to each student's proficiency level. Each student is allocated the number of entitled ENL minutes mandated by the NYCDOE CR Part 154-2 (ENL Units of Study). The schedule is programmed into our NYC DOE STARs site. For our ENL program in grades K-8 , the Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, 180 minutes of the 360minutes is Integrated ENL. Transitioning and Expanding students in grades K-8 receive 180 minutes weekly, 90 minutes of the 180 minutes is Integrated ENL. Commanding students also receive 90minutes a week of integrated support. All teachers receive a schedule of the ENL program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Explicit ENL instruction given by the ENL teacher incorporates thematic-based units with content, language,and behavioral objectives which are aligned with the New York State Common Core Learning Standards and the New Language Progressions for English as a New Language. Through small group instruction, English language skills are embedded within all content area lessons to meet short term objectives and long term goals. Skills-based instruction, including grammar and spelling, is woven into each lesson. Students are asked to know the slight differences between content area vocabulary by justifying their responses. Students extrapolate knowledge in content areas through verbal and visual cues. In literacy, students must support their reasoning when writing essays. Students must also apply cross-content knowledge in specific content areas such as Social Studies and Science. Throughout various grades, the units of study are aligned with classroom instruction. Writing instruction focuses on connecting activities with the various cultural and personal experiences of our students. For more advanced students, we utilize stories with more complex vocabulary. For reading and writing responses, we provide guided group work , as well as work on more advanced literacy skills. Students use listening centers in their classrooms and work in small groups to expedite the language learning process. Where it is purposeful, we also provide students with access to glossaries, videos, and leveled library books in the student's home language. Lessons are approached using various strategic ENL methods such as the Cognitive Academic Language Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Response (TPR), the Language Experience Approach (LEA), SIOP and the Holistic Language Approach. Graphic organizers, specialized writing papers, personal glossaries, singing, and multisensory approaches are also used. Strategies, such as front loading, the introduction of content specific academic vocabulary words using pictures and video. Our school uses a variety of technology such as desktop computers, lab tops, Ipads, SmartBoards, and ELMOs. The online computer programs used are: Brainpop, Brainpop ESL, A-Z Reading, Scholastic News, Newsela, Read Write Think, and Read Works. The instruction models provided are Stand-Alone and Integrated. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher provide ENL instruction in all subject areas to ELL/MLL students. Planning, preparation, and discussion is a collaborative process by both the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs are given the Spanish LAB and the results are given to classroom teachers to aid with instruction. Students are asked to write in their home language as their English proficiency develops. We will ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year by conferring with teachers, students, and families to determine the best language for assessments. The Multilingual Literacy Screener will also be administered to students to determine each student's literacy level in their home language. The ENL teacher and the 2018-19 CEP 55  Assistant Principal will collaborate with classroom teachers to ensure that students are provided with the assessments that best meet students' needs in their home language. With the help of other pedagogues who speak English and the child's home language , each student will be evaluated. At PS007 we have a Spanish speaking bilingual speech teacher (part-time) and social worker. For other home languages we will use the Language Translations Unit to support us through translations (writing) and interpretations (speaking). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE : These students will receive the mandated ENL instructional minutes based on their proficiency level. SIFE will participate in small group instruction, as well as receive intervention services (AIS/ AT-Risk SETTS) using both Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL models. We also work closely with the school social worker to ensure a positive transition into our educational program, social life, and cultural environment. A focus for our SIFE students is the development of literacy skills and best study practices. Since SIFE have informal interrupted education, we want to ensure that they receive support in both phonics and targeted tier 1 and 2 vocabulary. Support from additional staff includes special education teachers, paraprofessionals, and At-Risk SETTS teachers to ensure that our students receive at-risk services and/or supports in the classroom throughout their educational day. By including all specialists and support staff we are providing our students with a variety of personalized scaffolds and supports. Differentiation during the school day will include the following classroom instructional practices: content-based language instruction (teacher uses Language Experience photo stories); intense at-risk literacy development instruction (shared reading and writing); small differentiated reading groups ; leveled reading texts; technology support for visuals, videos, and translations; home language support (books in HL and bilingual glossaries); personalized folders ( with strategies, graphic organizers, directions, and mentor texts), peer mentors; vocabulary study; and classroom visuals. For the ENL teacher and classroom teachers, the SIFE curriculum is used as a tool to help create Personal Intervention Plans. Online support for reading online is also used throughout the school year. These programs are A-Z reading and United For Literacy. Fundations and Just words by the Wilson Reading Foundation supports student literacy development. While ENL instruction for our newcomers focuses on developing language skills, it also provides support to help ELLs integrate into the new environment and culture. Each student is given a peer buddy or two to help with social and academic routines, understand school culture, as well as meet other students to foster friendships. A school lunch club is also available to socialize and play games during lunchtime. B. Newcomers- ENLs in US schools less than three years: Within the mainstream classroom, small group instruction with language support is provided. Newcomers also receive extra support during teacher lessons by receiving differentiated materials such as writing sheets, vocabulary definitions with visual pages, a "double dose" of the lesson, special content specific video, Ipads for recording stories and vocabulary, and graphic organizers specific to each lesson that carefully scaffolds student progress. Teachers scaffold lessons appropriate to each child’s ENL proficiency level. Students are given supports such as picture dictionaries and bilingual glossaries in their home language. Teachers are offered strategies and access to various tools/resources to support students. Visual representations are displayed in the classroom, as well as language prompts to support student’s oral language. Teacher strategies for ELLs include paced and repeated speech. Reminders about the focus and content of the lesson. Support in supporting ELLs to speak and gain fluency in pronunciation and reflection. Teachers are expected to build in time to pre-teach (and model) lesson content and new vocabulary. Recommendations for teachers include the following strategies: Record minilesson for repeated views. Create visuals as a nonlinguistic representation to improve comprehension and grasps concepts (diagrams, model steps, examples of finished products, etc.). Engage ELLs in small groups where students can practice social and academic language, allow more time for practice and 2018-19 CEP 56  participation. All teachers continue to communicate with the ELL teacher for best practices, learning strategies, and resource access. Give students “wait time” to listen and respond, as well as “talk-time” time to speak. Allow students to use their Home Language as a scaffold to support their ENL development. Focus on the Language Experience models to help students learn not only the language but culturally unique vocabulary and experiences. Use sentence frames to help students engage in academic conversations. C. Developing ELLs: Our developing ELLs participate in a variety of enrichment activities throughout the school day to provide opportunities for vocabulary development. Our developing ELLs also receive extra support during teacher lessons by receiving differentiated materials such as writing sheets, vocabulary definitions with visual pages, a "double dose" of the lesson, special content specific video, Ipads for recording stories and vocabulary, and graphic organizers specific to each lesson that carefully scaffolds student progress. Sentence starters and guiding questions are also used to encourage critical thinking and participation. These students also work in small groups or with partners or speak both English and the child's home language. Developing phonemic awareness and reading comprehension for ELLs will be supported by focusing on the following strategies: reviewing and being aware of miscues and mispronunciations; understanding questions; rereading for understanding; building prior knowledge (videos, books, songs, etc.); making connections and predictions; provide home language books for content support; previewing and building vocabulary;participating in classroom conversations; using before, during, and after reading strategies; using graphic organizers; monitor meaning; and using a protocol for strategies and discussions. They may also receive AIS services and instruction with levels of support as determined by predictive and standardized assessments results. Participation in a variety of enrichment activities provides opportunities for vocabulary development. D. Long Term ELLs: Long Term ELLs receive AIS services and instruction with levels of support as determined by predictive and standardized assessments results. Participation in a variety of enrichment activities provides opportunities for vocabulary development. A majority of these students have difficulties with reading and writing and also have IEPs. Long Term ELLs are provided with academic intervention services from our ENL teacher , RTI teachers, and AIS teachers in both Stand-Alone and Integrated models. SETTS is provided as an At-Risk academic intervention plan. The ENL teacher collaborates with teachers to plan small group instruction in their areas of deficiency in the four modalities of language acquisition . These supports include: personalized directions and steps, academic vocabulary glossary, on-level reading materials, lower leveled content reading texts, priming and front loading teaching methods, questioning strategies, language structures, participate in small differentiated reading and writing groups, computer lab tops for access to academic teaching videos and visuals. Developing phonemic awareness and reading comprehension for ELLs will be supported by focusing on the following strategies: reviewing and being aware of miscues and mispronunciations; understanding questions; rereading for understanding; building prior knowledge (videos, books, songs, etc.); making connections and predictions; provide home language books for content support; previewing and building vocabulary;participating in classroom conversations; using before, during, and after reading strategies; using graphic organizers; monitor meaning; and using a protocol for strategies and discussions. At-Risk teachers work collaboratively with the ENL and IEP team to offer additional support within the classroom setting. Alternative assessments are also offered to identify growth and areas of sub-skills that need improvement. Alternative assessments include classroom portfolios and classroom based projects in all major subject areas. E. Former ELLs: Former ELLs are provided with additional support in English Language Arts and other content areas such as Science, Mathematics, and Social Studies. The ENL teacher conferences with and monitors the movement of Former ELLs and remains 2018-19 CEP 57  in communication with the ELA teacher to support students. Former ELLs are entitled to 90 minutes of instruction per week during the ENL integrated minutes. They are also invited to participate in the ELL Afterschool Title III program and receive AIS support as determined by their literacy assessments and teacher recommendations. Differentiation for Former ELLs continues with personalized supports as needed. These supports include personalized folders that contain literacy strategies, language structures, graphic organizers, planning supports, and academic vocabulary. They are invited to be a peer mentor to current ELLs supporting both students both academically and socially during reading partnerships and project based assignments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to support ELLs-SWDs the ENL teacher and classroom teachers use multiple instructional strategies to accelerate English Language Development and meet the needs of each student. All students receive ELL services and receive their mandated IEP services. The IEP goals and the ENL goals are used to guide teachers and personalize teaching for each student. The ENL teacher, IEP team, teachers and support staff communicate during common planning and data analysis meetings to provide access to academic areas such as ELA, Mathematics, and Science while accelerating English Language Development. Teachers follow the grade curriculum using various teaching models, scaffolds, and differentiates for each student. For example, teachers can teach the content area in co-teaching settings, creating small groups, and using scaffolded supports such as graphic organizers, leveled texts, charts with visuals and diagrams displayed in the classroom. Before, during or after lessons, vocabulary reviews are given, lessons are repeated, and concepts are pretaught during mini-lessons before whole class lessons. Multiple entry-points for learning are provided using visuals, picture clues/cues, targeted vocabulary, and visuals to enhance content and language comprehension. Techniques for engaging and using language are routine such as focused quality questioning (question starters are used), class discussions with awareness to language function (ask and answer questions, responding to ideas, stating an opinion, and summarizing). Teacher scaffolded techniques such as chunking lessons, modeling, and repetition further support English Language Acquisition and academic content. The grade level materials and curriculum used are: The use of technology, such as Smartboards and laptops. Online reading programs such as BrainPop, BrainPopESL, BrainPop Espanol, StarFall, Khan Academy, and iReady are all readily accessible online tools used to support English proficiency and content. The language supports used are the Wilson Reading Programs (Just Words for middle school students and Fundations for lower school students), Teachers College Reading and Writing Program (with its writing supports and required read alouds and mentor texts), Fountas and Pinnell reading books, and Scholastic on level reading books. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To ensure ELLs with disabilities are serviced in the least restrictive environment, all self-contained and mainstream classrooms with students with IEPS follow the commom core standards to design curriculum with ENL strategies and differentiation for all ELLs. All students participate in the general education ELA programs. All Stand-Alone support is designed by reading levels, specialized needs, and NYSESLAT level, regardless of IEP status, however IEP goals are followed and modifications and supports for ELLs are implemented and modified as needed. Effective instruction for ELLs with disabilities includes direct explicit instruction that is personalized and scaffolded. Literacy instruction will focus on comprehension, skills development, study strategies, organization, and vocabulary enhancement. . Programs such as the Wilson Reading Program (Fundations and Just Words) is used to support phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and reading comprehension. ELL-SWDs are supported by the IEP and ENL teams, as well as classroom teachers. The New Language Arts Progressions is also used by the ENL and classroom teachers to support our ELLs by level of proficiency within each standard. 2018-19 CEP 58  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order to streamline ENL instruction with that of the monolingual classroom, the ENL curriculum is fully integrated with all elements of a balanced literacy workshop model. Factors that determine differentiated instruction/targeted interventions include groupings based on proficiency level, language development level, extent of formal schooling and performance on the LSRW (listening, speaking, reading and writing) components of the NYSESLAT. Our freestanding ENL program also allows ELL students to fully participate in the content areas of Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. The ENL teacher, Principal and Assistant Principal work collaboratively with content area teachers to support the development of ELL students’ academic language in the content areas. Running records are used to monitor each students’ reading progress. Content area lesson plans include activities and strategies that support the development of ELL students’ academic language. Our school follows the TCRWP unit of study calendar in both Reading and Writing. Throughout the day we offer targeted intervention through AIS/ At-Risk SETTS supports using Stand-Alone model in a small group setting. At-Risk supports are offered to students as an extra support that cannot otherwise be given by an AIS teacher . ICT classrooms are also available and offer our students extra support within the classroom. Our ICT classrooms offer students access to both a Special Education teacher and a General Education teacher. Supports such as scaffolded lessons are planned for these particular students using appropriate technology (IPADS, Laptops) leveled reading books and articles, writing and reading tools, and graphic organizers along with a scaffolded approach for comprehension leading towards the successful completion of their work. PS7 also utilizes extra support staff such as our student teachers from Hunter College and the School of Social Work. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017-2018 school year, a new program that has been purchased by PS 007 is the IReady program. It will be used to assess students in reading and mathematics from grades K-8. It will target exact student needs in each sub-skill level and will monitor student progress for short term and long term goals. It also offers support for best instructional practices for individual, small group, and whole group instruction. It also provides personalized instruction to target specific student goals. A Lunch Club for ELLs will be offered during their lunch period twice a week to offer students opportunities to meet new students and practice speaking in English. This club will offer cycles for various focuses such as social language and engagement through games and activities, as well as book clubs (books based on student choice on various topics). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs are being discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all of our school programs and SBO programs. ELL students participate in two Saturday Academy programs. One offers supplemental ELA and Math instruction and the other is an ENL Saturday Enrichment program. ELL students in need of AIS services participate in our extended day ELL Enrichment program. Fourth through eighth grade ELL students, along with their monolingual peers, participate in an arts oriented after school program sponsored by the 21st Century Program. Students can choose to participate in musical theater, dance, digital photography/poetry, yoga and martial arts. Depending on their choice of club students meet once or twice a week. Students also have the opportunity to participate in sports related activities such as flag football, soccer, volleyball, basketball and softball. Flyers and permission slips are translated in the student's home language. We also use our online programs such as Khan Academy, IReady, BrainPop, and BrainpopESL as well as a number of online reading programs that provide students access to educational videos, pictures, and independent work. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 59  The instructional materials used to support ELLs are Guided Reading Books from Gear Up, Fundations (K-3), Just Words (6-8), Moving Into English (K-1), and the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop Units. The online programs used are: BrainPop, BrainPop ESL StarFall, various online grammar and reading skills sites, Capstone Guided Reading books, ESL.com, ESL Kids, Newsela, Read Works, Read Write Think, Scholastic, and National Geographic. Students in 1st through 4th grade use innovative, interesting and fun software that can be fully customized to individual student needs. Lessons include phonics and reading comprehension. Students in 5th through 8th grade use software that will allow them to apply experience and context to generate meanings for unfamiliar words and to more accurately define known words. Newcomers will use software that contain multi-level stories that teach reading comprehension. Other instructional materials include the Wilson Reading Program and The TCRWP for reading and writing. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For home language support students use bilingual glossaries, a home language library in the ENL classroom. Newcomers are encouraged to write in their home language. Literacy and Math workshops are also held with parents and children together to provide opportunities to have shared literacy and math experiences in a fun and guided environment. Home language support is also provided through cultural awareness and experiences in the school by holding school-wide cultural events where everyone is welcome to participate. The school also provides bilingual books in Spanish and English, as well as books in Spanish. Students are invited to create bilingual books in their home language and English, as well as write oral stories in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In order to ensure that ELLs receive the required services and resources according to age and grade level, the ENL teacher and the AP create an academic schedule. The schedule is created using the minutes mandated by the NYC DOE. ELLs required service minutes are determined by their level of proficiency based on the NYSESLAT results annually. Each child is then serviced within the allotted time according to the grade level band rule of no more than two consecutive grade bands during each session. Proficiency levels are also considered within this schedule. For example, each session is scheduled to service grade bands Beginning/ Emerging or Emerging/Transitioning. Our resources include texts and materials that correspond to the grade levels curriculum and content, as well as correspond with each levels students’ reading levels and English Proficiency levels. This includes the scaffolds, academic Math manipulatives, reading and online resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At of this time, our school does not share or coordinate with other schools or the school in our building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the beginning of the school year, our newly enrolled ELLs (kindergarten students and newcomer students from various grade levels, states, nonpublic schools, and from other countries) are welcomed by the Pupil Personnel school secretary, Principal, the ENL teacher, Parent Coordinator, the School Social Worker, and our School Based Organization leads. Each student is given a tour of the school, assigned members our community to support the students and their families during their adjustment period. Students are also assigned "welcome buddies" to help them engage socially and culturally with their new school setting. These students are immediately invited to join our Extended Day and Afterschool Programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 CEP 60  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends professional development held within our school’s ELL network. PD for all ELL personnel at PS 7 involves outside and in-school PD with TC writing Conference Days. Workshops analyze strategies for ELLs that are specifically designed to demonstrate how teachers can support ELLs by embedding strategies and scaffolding student learning within any lesson. On Mondays after the school day, the staff meets for professional development. Small group ELL support is also demonstrated by the literacy coach Martha Guttierez and the ENL teacher M. Lehmann-Gonzalez. The Principals Mr. David Graeber and Mr. Robert Perales introduce/ lead the meetings for the first half of the scheduled time, then teachers break up into smaller PD groups or remain as one PD group. Professional Development Dates Include: Staff Workshop for The Introduction to ELLs and RTI 10/16/2017 Staff Workshop for ELLs- Literacy goals and strategies/Common Core and the New Language Arts Progressions 10/30/2017 Staff Workshop for ELLs with Learning Disabilities 11/06/2017 Staff Workshop for ELLs and the Arts 11/20/2017 Staff Workshop for ELLs -NYSESLAT 12/04/2017 Staff Workshop for ELLs-NYSESLAT Reflections 05/21/2017 Parent Orientation/Welcome for ELLs 10/10/2017 Parent Workshop for ELLs and literacy support 11/07/2017 Parent Workshops for ELLs and Response To Intervention 11/14/2017 Parent Workshop for ELLs- Math games 11/21/2017 Parent Workshop for understanding the NYSELAT 04/02/2017 For teachers of ELLs and the ENL teacher, professional development is offered within PS7 using the professional development plan and attended by or led by faculty members. The Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) are used for curriculum planning. The Literacy Coach, school leaders, and teachers meet weekly to discuss instruction, design curriculum aligned to NLAP/CCLS. The staff develops plans to include all learners and differentiated approaches to help students meet the standards and challenging content. The ENL teacher attends borough and district-wide professional development. On Mondays PS 7 has staff meetings and professional development. Throughout the week grade level meetings are held and teachers meet to discuss student progress, professional development, curriculum planning, and analyze assessments and student progress. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 61  Professional development for all staff members is facilitated by our ENL teacher and Literacy Coach. Workshops focus on the identification of ELLs and second language acquisition, assessing the needs of newcomers, parental involvement, developing academic language through the content areas, as well as tips to make lessons more comprehensible for all learners. These workshops are presented during staff development days and/or during the monthly staff meetings. All classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, School Based Support Staff, service providers and parent coordinator attend these meetings. In addition, professional development is provided throughout the year and is facilitated by the Manhattan Field Support ELL Specialists . At the beginning of the school year, the Principal meets with various Network Specialists to plan informational meetings/professional development for school staff to support the success of ELLs. Workshops include topics such as: Using Data to Drive Instruction, Developing Academic Language Through Content Area Teaching, Developing Academic English and Writing Skills, Vocabulary Development through Read Alouds and others. Records of teacher attendance is kept by the presenter and filed in the Principal's office . Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences and the initial parent orientation, PS 7 provides annual individual meetings with the parents or guardians of ELLs once a year with the ENL teacher to discuss progress in language development, English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs. Interpretation/ translation services are provided according to parent needs. The Language Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted for translations in writing (such as IEPs, school letters, and Student Information) and for over-the-phone interpretation services. The online website provides and posts translations for all NYC- DOE non-student specific letters, notices, and parent pamphlets. Parents are also given the Parents Guide to Language Access at the beginning of the year and upon registration to offer them immediate and yearlong access to language interpretation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are a priority at our school we have many school wide activities such as: Bring your Dad to school day, Multicultural Night, Several musical performances, Education Through Music concerts, Family Math Night, Poetry Night and an Art Show. Parents also attend volleyball tournaments and basketball games. Each year the parent coordinator will remind ELL parents to use the NYC DOE website to access information pertaining to their child's education, as well as to keep them informed about up-coming school and NYC DOE city wide events. For example, there is a flyer (in 7 different languages) about curriculum nignt and Parent-Teacher Nights. The parent coordinator also distributes parent informational letters to all parents of ELLs and makes a concerted effort to work especially close to these families. Additionally, the ENL teacher and the Parent Coordinator have an Open Door Policy where forms, surveys, and letters can be dropped off and parents can informally meet to discuss any issues or concerns. The P.C. also uses her own parent survey form to determine the optimal time for meetings, as well as which days and times during the week parents are available. The PS 7 surveys also ask parents to list their hobbies and interests, as well as write any questions or additional information. These survey results help PS 7 to develop workshops that reflect the needs of parents and students, as well as inform us about our ELL community. In the ENL program model, home language support is achieved through utilizing parental support for continuing literacy experiences at home in the child's home language. Workshops are given to parents to inform and educate them about how 2018-19 CEP 62  they can support their children through literacy. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mr. David Graeber, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS007 School DBN: 04M007 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. David Graeber Title Principal Assistant Principal M. Abraham Parent Coordinator M. Lehmann-Gonzalez ENL/Bilingual Teacher G. Moore Parent M. Guittierez Teacher/Subject Area M. Helt M. Gutierrez D. Lee A. Estrella F. Castro Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 09/28/2017 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M007 School Name: PS 7 Superintendent: A. Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jenelle Fiori Teacher Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration to PS 7, parents fill out the Home Language Survey. The ENL teacher/coordinator, the school secretary, and the Parent Coordinator work collaboratively to interview parents and students. The ENL teacher gets support from the PC and secretary for translation in Spanish. For families that speak a language other than English or Spanish, a HLS is completed in that person's language and a translator is made available through the DOE's Translation services. The list for available languages for assistance is posted in the main office, the parent-teacher room, and the Parent Coordinator's desk. During this time an informal screening is conducted to ensure that the information written on the survey is an accurate representation of the parent and the student. This information is then recorded into ATS by the pupil accounting secretary. Data collection for language preferences are collected through HILS, ATS Reports, emergency/blue contact cards, teacher surveys, and class data. The ENL teacher, Parent Coordinator , and school secretary review the language preferences with the assistant principal and inform the principal and staff of multiple languages spoken within the 2018-19 CEP 66  community. Staff is aware that written copies of parent preferred languages and verbal translations can be obtained. Blue Emergency Contact cards, parent surveys, and parent notices are all translated in the home language of the parent. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our findings indicate that our parents need oral and written information in Spanish. These findings were taken from written and oral communications from the school in both English and Spanish for the benefit of all of our families. For families that require translated resources in limited numbers, we provide all translated DOE documents to families that prefer a langauge other than Spanish. Preferred languages in both written and oral communication are primarily Spanish. Arabic and Bengali are two other languages that are of preferred choices as well. Many parents prefer to have both their home language and English written communication sent home. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is used to assist us whenever possible. The administrative staff use telephone translation services as needed and/or requested by parents in need of such services. Translation services are also rendered from the DOE vendors. 2018-19 CEP 67  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Handbooks and School Safety information are distributed during the beginning of the school year. Parent newsletters and calendars are distributed on a monthly basis. Announcements for school-wide events, PTA meetings, parental workshops, and school information regarding testing or upcoming activities are distributed throughout the year as needed. Entitlement letters are distributed in September to all students who were administered the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT. Translated versions of these letters are accessed on the DOE website. The school sends out monthly calendars to all parents. A two sided calendar with English and Spanish is distributed. The school has not translated these calendars in Arabic or Bengali in the past because parents have not requested this in the past since English was also a written preference choice. This year, the school plans to contact these parents to determine if parents would like the monthly school calendars translated. Google Translations would be used for 2018-19 CEP 68  this purpose and parent volunteers would also be asked to support this effort. For NYCDOE official documents, the NYCDOE website would be used to download parent notifications to send to parents. The School plans to submit translation requests two weeks before the school's scheduled events. Documents in Spanish are translated by the school secretary and for parents who prefer Arabic or Bengali, the school will have these documents translated by the DOE Translation and Interpretations Unit. In late January the school will be hosting an Antibully workshop and a 6-8 week Healthy Eating Workshop hosted by Cornell University and will submit any requests for translations two weeks before. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Typically the formal face-to-face meetings our school will have include: interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night Parent-Teacher Conferences Parent Orientation for ELLs PTA meetings Test Orientation Middle School Orientation Muliticultural Nights Parent Workshops Parent-Teacher Meetings IEP meetings 2018-19 CEP 69  Parent Meetings Phone-based meetings for parent outreach about the curriculum, school functions, and standardized tests, as well as important dates and deadlines 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A welcome poster posts information to parents and families on how to obtain translation or interpretation services. At the beginning of the school year, we will send a letter home in English and Spanish to families detailing the rights of families to information released by the school. For additional outreach, parents of newly arrived students will be invited to events in the fall that will outline their rights for translation and interpretation services and the relevant contact information for the school and regional and city contacts for such services. The school will distribute the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in the home language of the families to review and detain for future need. We will also obtain in Spanish and other langauges as needed the appropriate forms for families to comply with CR A-663 in the areas of centally produced documents or student specific documents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 70  Our Language Access Coordinator turn-keys all information and procedures that need to be followed during monthly staff meetings. Brochures and other pertinent inormation are distributed and discussed. Updates to any information are given via email, school memorandums and/or discussed during future professional developments. During Parent Workshops and meetings, parents will be given a parent feedback sheet to collect information about the school's quality and availability of translation services. Parents will also be interviewed during dismissal and drop-off in the middle and ending of the school year to gather information from parents who may not attend these workshops. 2018-19 CEP 71 
