2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M012 School Name: TAG YOUNG SCHOLARS Principal: JANETTE CESAR 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Talented and Gifted School for Young Scholars 310400010012 Kindergarten through Eighth Grade 240 E 109 Street, NY, NY 10029 School Number (DBN): 04m012 212-860-6003 Phone Number: 212-831-1842 Fax: Jonathan Dascal JDascal@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Janette Cesar Yvonne Acevedo AnandRagunath Nina Reininger Deirdre Pace NA NA Andrea Scott District Information Geographical District: 4 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120th Street, NY, NY 10035 AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-831-1842 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor, 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jonathan Dascal Lydia Ruiz AnandRagunath Andrea Scott SorayaSantiago Pamela Simon Kathy Fernando *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabrielle Arabia Kristine Terzi Deirdre Pace Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our Vision The Talented and Gifted School for Young Scholars’ (TAG) vision is to provide an environment that prepares students to apply their knowledge in order to question, evaluate, solve, and resolve the ever-rising global challenges. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our Mission To accomplish our vision, the TAG school will provide a curriculum that fosters speaking, writing, researching, and investigating. TAG's environment will encourage collaboration amongst all stakeholders, in addition to engagement in civil discourse. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Talented and Gifted School for Young Scholars (TAG) is a public school located in East Harlem, New York, serving academically gifted students in grades K-8. TAG is an ethnically diverse Citywide Gifted and Talented (G&T) school. Of TAG’s 569 students, 25% are Black, 19% Hispanic, 34% Asian, 15% White, and 7% identify as other. Students at TAG are exceptional, with incoming kindergarten students scoring on average in the 99th percentile on a standardized test used to determine admissions to gifted programs in New York City. TAG students work at least one year above grade level. Eighth grade students at TAG take four high school level courses (Common Core Algebra, Common Core English, US History, and Living Environment), as well as the Second Language Proficiency exam in Spanish. The school ensures that curricula, across grades and content areas, integrate Common Core Learning Standards thus providing all students with access to rigorous tasks that promote college and career readiness. Teachers are strategic in demonstrating effective instructional practices informed by a common set of beliefs about how students learn best that yield high quality student work. Administrators and teachers purposefully use common assessment data, checks for understanding, and actionable feedback to increase students' awareness of their next learning steps. All teachers engage in decision-making through structured collaborative inquiry, regularly analyzing student work that results in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. We have renewed our relationship with The Great Books Foundation to help support our schools focus of increasing academic rigor through the use of Shared Inquiry discussion. Our Pencil Partner, CA Technologies is providing guidance and support on College and Career Readiness for a select group of 8th Grade students. The Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and TAG have partnered to provide an instructor for an early childhood music program to augment our well established upper grade instrumental music program. 2018-19 CEP 10  Through our relationship with Hunter College, we host interns and student teachers to further support the learning in the classroom. The school is high performing, having received an overall grade of “A” from the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) in its most recent progress report. In the fall of 2013 , TAG was the recipient of the Blackboard Award for Outstanding Elementary and Middle School. The school was also recognized by then Mayor Bloomberg as one of the top 22 schools in New York State. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. TAG has 37.5% of its students taking part in the free or reduced lunch program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the course of the last five years, TAG has committed significant financial and personnel resources to develop Shared Inquiry practices school-wide to address Reading Anchor Standard One of the Common Core Learning Standards. This has led to a school-wide strength in students' ability in questioning and evaluating complex texts. Students have also developed an increased ability to use text evidence in discussions across the curriculum. As a result, our students have experienced overall growth and progress on various assessments, including the New York State ELA Common Core exam in grades 3-8 and the New York State Common Core ELA Regents in grade 8. The school’s success with its data-driven approach to address Reading Anchor Standard One of the common core learning standards prompted the need to establish a similar systematic approach in other areas of student learning. After reviewing the school-wide results of the New York State exams and school-wide benchmark assessments, trends in areas of challenge were noted across the school. As a result, the professional learning is driven towards improving these school-wide trends. However, some areas of challenge were only specific to certain grades. These circumstances warranted a more targeted approach to addressing grade-specific needs. A formalized, systematic school-wide approach to data-driven instruction is currently in place to fill these individualized gaps in student learning. Based on a survey of the teaching staff, 90% of respondents stated a desire to create assessment teams to help further the work on data-driven instruction. Focus: Our focus in 2018-2019 will be to focus on Project Based Learning. This will help in increasing academic rigor throughout the curriculum. Through increased academic rigor, we will challenge all students to achieve greater success in all academic areas. In addition, we are devoting significant resources to developing our Science-Technology-Engineering-Arts-Math (STEAM) foundation by further integrating science and literacy across all grades and classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M012 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 587 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 6 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 39.0% % Attendance Rate 33.9% % Reduced Lunch 0.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.8% 17.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.08 0% 38% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 96.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 96.9% 6.5% 4.6% 18.6% 38.8% 10.2% 4 8% 3.6 98.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Throughout the course of the 2017-2018 school year, it became apparent that TAG needed to devote more resources to developing our understanding of project based instruction, creating units that are interdisciplinary, and involve hands on learning. For the 2017-2018 school year, the administration purchased professional development books for Project Based Learning (PBL). These materials were distributed the teaching staff. In June of 2018, the school sent a team of five teachers and one administrator to a Project Based Learning Conference in California. Based on the 2016-2017 CEP parent survey, 57.5 % of TAG families expressed interest in an increase in Project Based Learning. In discussion, teachers and administration agreed that this approach is needed in order to increase the level of rigor, application, and complexity best suited for gifted learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of kindergarten through eighth grade teachers will incorporate the three gold standard elements of project-based learning which include a driving question, student voice and choice, and a public product in at least two units of study. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will administer a student interest inventory related to the topic of the project based learning unit. The purpose of the interest inventory is to identify areas of student interest for further investigation. Kindergarten through Eighth grade teachers September,2018 through June 2019 Teachers will utilize the professional learning book, Setting the Stage for Project Based Learning, by John Larmer, during Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to design project based learning units according to the Gold Standard developed by the Buck Institute for Education. Kindergarten through eight grade teachers September 2018 through June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Kindergarten through Eighth grade teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Kindergarten through eighth grade teachers School Administrators will observe and debrief at least one PBL Unit lesson from Kindergarten through second grade classroom teachers. Teachers will receive verbal and written feedback for next steps in instruction. Kindergarten through eighth grade teachers November, 2018 through April , 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Kindergarten through eighth grade teachers 2018-19 CEP 15 Kindergarten through eighth grade teachers will host the final projects. Parents and students will reflect on work done. November , 2018 through April, 2019 Principal Kindergarten through Eighth grade teachers, students, and parents Assistant Principals Kindergarten through eighth grade teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From October 2018 to May 2019, families will be invited to learning student celebrations hosted by classroom teachers from their project-based learning units. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Pencil Partner Grant, New York State Tax Levy (NYSTL) funds; substitute teachers will be recruited to support teachers in common planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 13, 2019,, 100% of Kindergarten through fourth grade teachers will have been observed conducting a lesson from one of their project based learning units. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Formal/Informal Observations conducted by administration and teacher leaders and the Buck Institute for Education’s Project Based Learning rubric. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: According to our comprehensive assessment of the 2016-2017 School Survey results, 2016-2017 State Test scores and the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report and Snapshot (the most recent data available):  96% of students strongly agree/agree that they are learning a lot in their classes to help them prepare for the next grade.  95% of students feel safe in school hallways and common areas.  Student-centered lessons are emphasized throughout the school. All students produce meaningful work products and demonstrate ownership of their learning.  Utilize Jupiter software to capture Merits (positive acts performed by the students) Needs: According to our comprehensive assessment of the 2016-2017 School Environment Survey, the results yielded an average of 75% positive responses under the Personal Attention and Support category. The following statistics below constitute the lowest rated areas by students on the survey:  Only 62% of students say that teachers notice if they are upset.  70% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something.  Only 84% of students agreed or strongly agreed that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in.  70% of students agreed or strongly agreed that most students at their school treat each other with respect.  55% of the infractions documented on Jupiter were for talking, and only 2% of total infractions prompted a call to the student’s parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 18  By June 2019, we will meet or exceed our percentage of positive responses from the Personal Attention and Support section of the School Environment Survey, with the goal of reaching 85% positive responses. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School counseling staff and teacher leaders will research community resources to develop a set of best practices for academic stress reduction. All students Grades K-8 September 2018 through June 2019 Classroom Teachers Guidance Counselor The RTI team will be embedded into Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to support teachers with Social/Emotional Learning (SEL) strategies in their classrooms with select students All students Grades K-8 September 2018 through June 2019 Community Coordinator Principal Assistant Principals Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Community Coordinator Parent Coordinator Classroom teachers Principal Assistant Principals Guidance Counselor Community Coordinator Classroom Teachers Guidance Counselor Community Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Coordinator September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 August 2018- June 2019 All students Grades K-8 December 2018 through June 2019 To increase parent involvement and engagement, the Guidance Counselor and Community Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator will provide Parent workshops on reducing academic stress for students. Teachers will regularly update Jupiter Grades, our online grading system to alert parents to any academic and behavioral progress The guidance counselor and community coordinator will develop monthly workshops to support classes based on their individual needs. All students and parents from grades Kindergarten through eight All students Grades K-8 Trust: Students in grades 5-8 will meet weekly in teacher-led advisory groups to build trust among students. All students, grades 5-8 A team of staff members will receiver RULER training All staff and students 2018-19 CEP 20 Staff trained in RULER will turnkey information to staff All staff and students September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Guidance Counselor, Community Coordinator and Parent Coordinator will provide Parent workshops on reducing academic stress for students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Life Skills Curriculum will be purchased. Substitutes will be hired to allow teachers to go to professional development. Schedules will be modified to allow counselors to meet with teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will have implemented the RULER Mood Meter chart to help students regularly recognize their Social/Emotional state. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will take a survey regarding the implementation of the RULER curriculum to gage the ability of students to recognize the Social/Emotional state for better self-regulation strategies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on an assessment of our current professional learning in the school, our strengths include researched-based professional learning opportunities focused on teacher collaboration. The focus of teacher teams centers upon student work and inquiry-based approaches to improving student achievement. Some of the features of our professional learning include:  Inquiry teams comprised of teachers within the same grade band that use a protocol for consistently looking at student work and determining next steps and implications for teaching  Professional learning sessions designed on the surveyed interest of teachers  Teacher-selected professional learning sessions.  On-going professional learning to support the shared inquiry method across all classrooms through outside consultants and internal support from lead teachers.  Professional learning based on student performance data  Based on analysis of RALLY ELA Assessments from June 2016-January 2017, the the school-wide performance on Standard RI.4 (vocabulary in informational text) increased by 21.6% (63.6% in June 2016, 85.2% in January 2017) Based on an assessment of our current professional learning and staff reflections in the school, our areas for improvement include:  Professional learning on social-emotional learning for the teaching staff and guidance counselors  Developing personalized social-emotional learning plans for students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K-8 will create “If-Then” plans to brainstorm social-emotional triggers and follow up with corresponding actions to overcome social-emotional challenges. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional learning on social-emotional learning will be provided to all K-8 teachers to support the application of de-escalation strategies students All K-4 classroom teachers will plan and execute morning and/or afternoon meetings on social-emotional topics to support the classroom community. School counselors will support the application of the if-then plans for students exhibiting the greatest social-emotional learning challenges. Kindergarten though Eighth Grade Teachers September2018 through June 2019 Kindergarten though Eighth Grade Teachers September2018 through June 2019 Kindergarten though Eighth Grade Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 School counselors will plan and execute advisory sessions with Fifth through Eighth grade students to foster social-emotional intelligence. Fifth Grade through 8th Grade teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Community Coordinator Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Community Coordinator Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will send questionnaires and surveys to families so they can keep track and update the school on what they have noticed from their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Contract for Excellence money will be used to provide substitute teachers for those attending professional development outside the school to be turn-keyed. In additional substitute teachers will be used to provide additional preparation and planning periods for teachers to prepare Teacher-Led professional development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of students who were identified by school staff as being most in need of Social/Emotional support will demonstrate growth as measured by their progress towards their goal from their "If-Then Plans." . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Personalized goals from social-emotional plans (if-then plans) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. TAG is currently in its sixth year of implementing the shared inquiry discussion methods through the Junior Great Books program. Students have demonstrated strength in citing evidence from a text to support their ideas and turn taking during shared inquiry discussions. However, students would benefit from more support in strengthening their listening skills to build and question the ideas of others appropriately with the end goal of advancing a shared understanding of the text. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will facilitate shared inquiry discussions centered on applying social-emotional practices to a fictional or non-fictional text. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade-level teams will meet at least once a week during common preps to incorporate social-emotional practices into their shared inquiry discussions. Kindergarten through Eighth Grade Teachers September, 2018 through June, 2019 A consultant from Junior Great Books will provide coaching and professional learning workshops for the Kindergarten through grade eight teaching staff to hone teacher practice in using the shared inquiry process to leverage social-emotional practices. Kindergarten through Eight Grade Teachers September, 2018 through June, 2019 School administration or teacher leaders will observe and debrief at least two shared inquiry discussion lesson for Kindergarten through eighth grade classroom teachers. Teachers will receive either verbal and/or written feedback for next steps in instruction. Kindergarten through Eight Grade Teachers September, 2018 through June, 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Principal Assistant Principals We will invite trainers from The Great Books Foundation to facilitate parent workshops on how their program supports the social-emotional development of their Kindergarten through 8th Grade Parents September 2018 through June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Jupiter Grades and Class Dojo will be implemented to give all parents regular access and updates on social-emotional progress. Parents will have the opportunity to participate in a shared inquiry workshop and learn about how the method can be used to support social-emotional learning growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Contract for Excellence funds will be used to hire a consultant to develop a daily schedule that provides more common planning time and professional learning time for each grade band. In addition substitute teachers will 2018-19 CEP 26  be used to provide additional preparation and planning periods for teachers to work with Assistant Principals on developing and implementing best practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of teachers will have conducted at least one shared inquiry discussion to support social-emotional practices in literature or nonfiction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Measure Of Teacher Practice chart Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. TAG has engaged teachers, a Parent Teacher Association, and staff that are committed to the school’s success. They all take proactive measures to foster a community that is welcoming, inclusive, collaborative, and communicative. These strengths are exhibited in the results from TAG’s 2016-2017 School Quality Guide and the School Quality Snapshot:  98% of students agreed or strongly agreed that, in general, their teachers present positive images of people from a variety of races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds.  93% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  91% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often.  *This is an increase from the 85% from the 2015-2016 results.  93% of those surveyed responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties and TAG’s formation of effective partnerships with families and outside organizations to improve the school.  90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. Using responses from the 2018 CEP Survey that was distributed to all TAG parents in May of 2018, the SLT will prioritize School-wide unity which includes adopting or enhancing activities meant to create connections among students, and families of students, across race, gender, age and backgrounds Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will implement five events/initiatives that will have a focus towards building connections amongst TAG families and students. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Post an advanced planning calendar on both the TAG and PTA websites to be updated monthly or as needed. Parents Schedule workshops, meetings and events at alternate times Parents September, 2018 through June, 2019 September, 2018 through June, 2019 TAG administration TAG PTA Parent Coordinator TAG administration TAG PTA Provide childcare services at workshops and meetings. Parents Hold (4) themed “Family Friday” events (i.e. Give Back Night, STEM night, Spirit Day, Multicultural Day) Parents September,2018 through June, 2019 September, 20178through June, 2019 Hold a middle school parent and student mixer at the beginning of the school year. Parents October 2018 Hold high school preparation workshops for 8th grade parents and invite interested 6th and 7th grade parents. Parents Implement the “Book Buddy” program using an elementary grade and middle school grade TAG Students September, 2018 through December, 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator TAG administration TAG PTA Parent Coordinator TAG administration TAG PTA Parent Coordinator TAG PTA, Community Coordinator, Parent Coordinator TAG Administration Guidance Counselor Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Vanderbilt YMCA, Common Pantry Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board and General Members, Funds allocated from the PTA budget. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have implemented two events/initiatives and have adequate promoted each event in order to ensure participation. We will send out a school-wide parent survey to gauge success of these events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets, online registrations, parent survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendation, Achieve3000 on-line instruction Teacher recommendation, iXL, Performance Series Teacher recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Achieve3000,SmartyAnts, repeated reading, on-line resources, high-interest readings, differentiation of process, content, product manipulatives, on-line resources, differentiation of content, process, product iXL, differentiation of process, content, product, hands-on, small group, one-to-one, peer tutoring, SmartyAnts, Achieve3000 before, during, and after school small group, one-to-one, peer tutoring, i-Ready, iXL before, during, and after school small group, one-to-one, peer tutoring before, during, and after school Social Studies Teacher recommendation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendation, parent request, observations by SBST high-interest content, on-line resources differentiation of process, content, product, high-interest content, on-line resources Life-Skills curriculum, role-play, counselling games, journaling, small group, one-to-one, peer tutoring before, during, and afterschool small group, one-to-one During school 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have ten students who are in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  Emotional support is provided by the guidance counselor. Counselor will pick student up for at-risk counseling, at minimum 1 time per week. uniforms and school supplies (books, pencils, pens, notebooks, backpacks, trade books, etc.) may also be provided. In addition, we have mobile technology (laptops and Chromebooks) for the students to use at home. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. For the 2018 fiscal year, our school received $10,026 in STH Title 1 funding. 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 04M012 Tag Young Scholars, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 04M012 Tag Young Scholars will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Distribute a Parent Handbook to all families at the beginning of the school year  Parents of students with Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) will receive regular communication from all related service providers, including the Special Education Teacher Support Service provider, Guidance Counselor, Speech Therapist, Physical Therapist, and Audiologist;  The Parent Coordinator will organize and host content-specific workshops, as well as workshops focusing on Social/Emotional startegies to assist parents in supporting their children; ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 39 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template 04M012 Tag Young Scholars , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name TAG Young Scholars Borough Manhattan School Number 012 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Janette Cesar Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Juliet Luther, Biled & ESOL Teacher/Subject Area Gabrielle Arabia, Gr1 Monoling Teacher/Subject Area Miguelina Castaldi, Spanish Related-Service Provider Ms. Tang, SETSS Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Jonathan Dascal,Jennifer Cosme Coach NA School Counselor Michelle Yrigoyen, Guidance Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Daniel Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 44  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 595 Total number of ELLs 5 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.84% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? TAG Young Scholars has currently in attendance 5 ELLs/MLLs. Three are in Kindergarten, and were identified in the Fall of 2018. One is in Grade 1 and was also identified in the Fall of 2018. One other Grade 1 student was identified in the Kindergarten year, Fall 2017. TAG Young Scholars currently uses a combination of teacher-created assessments, on-line assessments (SmartyAnts, Achieve3000) as well as RALLY. The use of these assessments is specific to grade levels. The data shows where each student is, in terms of grade level, as well as mastery of specific CC Standards . For English Language Learners/Multilingual Learners (ELLs/MLLs) who took the NYSITELL, we use those results to help guide instructional planning. The NYSITELL is useful to identify the level at which a student begins English language development upon school entrance. The data is used to identify a level, and plan corresponding services according to that level. Raw data 2018-19 CEP 45  can also initially help identify starting goal areas. For specific assessment information related to ELLs/MLLs, classroom learning and language development in English as a new language, The K-12 Speaking and Writing Universal English Language Development Rubrics will be incorporated into the TAG Young Scholars assessment calendar for periodic classroom assessments of ELLs/MLLs. In addition to any mandated times in the school year that the rubrics will be used for reporting progress, any teacher of any ELL student will use them at any time to inform instruction, as needed. The rubrics are a tool used to better understand ELLs/MLLs and how to work with them. They are used to assess spoken and/or written English language development as evidenced in class work, identify ELLs’ academic language development strengths and needs, plan instruction and strategies that address those needs, to identify targeted academic language learning goals for ELLs, assess ELLs’ performance on classroom speaking and writing tasks, and to support teacher co-planning of instruction or discussion of the strengths and needs of ELLs. To assess reading and listening, grade level reading assessments will be used to assess reading in English, and authentic listening rubrics will be identified for listening in English. Finally, on an annual basis, all ELLs/MLLs must take a New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). This test is summative and a measure of annual progress toward English proficiency. Analysis of modalities are used to inform initial areas of emphasis for the following school year. At this time, there are no plans for other formal tests, such as the ELL Baseline or Endline Assessments, due to the ages and grade levels of the students. At this time, one student has some early literacy in the home language. According to the student's parent, the child, a speaker of Russian, knows enough of the grapho-phonemic system in Russian to be able to write simple messages, and read simple text. To the extent that it may be needed, the school will rely on assistance from the parents to provide the school with information about these abilities. Speaking and Listening in Russian will be informally observed by a Russian speaking pedagogue to the extent to which this may be helpful in school. The student receives ENL services in the ENL program from non-Russian speakers. The remaining ELLs/MLLs students are speakers of Mandarin. None are literate in Mandarin. Mandarin oracy can be informally assessed through observation with the assistance of a Mandarin speaking teacher in TAG. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? On-line assessments are regularly scheduled. RALLY assessments are schedule 3 times per year. Teachers in classrooms collect data using the various other instruments named for periodically assessing English development in the four modalities, as per an assessment calendar. Home language observations are coordinated as needed. Administrators hold quarterly data meetings with teachers. At that time, information specific to ELLs/MLLs is brought together with all other data and analyzed holistically. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use all data-points that our ELL/MLL students generate as a result of taking NYC Performance Tasks, Achieve3000, SmartyAnts, RALLY, teacher-created assessments, and the NYSESLAT, a specific ELL/MLL assessment. At this time, ELLs/MLLs take some of the above, not all of the above assessments because of their ages and grade levels. Data, taken together and viewed holistically, are used to identify ELL/MLL students' strengths, areas of need, and to measure and/or describe progress made between assessment intervals. The date are used to identify new goals at each data collection point. I RECOMMEND TO REMOVE THE BELOW: SECTION IS NOT ABOUT PROGRAM EVALUATION, BUT ABOUT HOW STUDENT PROGRESS IS MEASURED AND HOW DATA IS USED FOR INSTRUCTION.If the students have made sufficient progress, we can assume that the programs were successful. If students did not meet expected goals, we would need to go and evaluate the effectiveness of the program used. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The administrative team holds quarterly data meetings to review results of any tests, tasks, or other data collected electronically, and provide them with copies of the results for their students, including any pertaining to ELLs/MLLs. Teachers combine this information with any classroom level ELL/MLL assessment results, conferring, or descriptive notes, to develop action plans based on the data. 2018-19 CEP 46 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RTI team uses the following criteria, as per the NYCDOE EPRG 2018-19, to consider as evidence of a need for RTI interventions: -Years of Bilingual Education/English to Speakers of other languages (ESOL) service -Literacy in English and the Home language -Status as a Student with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) -Content area needs of SIFE students -Home language literacy needs of SIFE students -Results on annual state testing in English Language Arts (ELA) and Content areas (Math, Science, etc.) -Bilingual Education/ESOL teacher recommendation -Content area teacher recommendation -Parent/Guardian request -Student work samples in English and in the Home language if possible -Bilingual educational evaluation if the student has or is suspected to have special needs Once ELLs/MLLs are identified for RTI needs, the RTI team evaluates all available data to determine the best course of action for each individual student. The team will recommend strategies for teachers to implement that have been proved effective by research with ELL/MLL students with similar needs. The team will recommend focus areas. The team will recommend any separate materials that are needed, when the situation calls for supplemental materials. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. TAG for Young Scholars has one program for ELLs/MLLs. This program consists of the students' regular curricular program with mandated English as a New Language (ENL) support during part of the week, and programmed according to proficiency levels. This means all teachers in contact with the student are part of the program. Students who are ELLs/MLLs, in grades 3-8, and eligible for state standardized tests, take the New York State English Language Arts (NYS ELA) and Math (NYS Math) exams. No Science? All ELLs/MLLs take the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). The ELA test is used, to the degree to which it is useful, depending on ELL/MLL levels of English proficiency, to evaluate how well supported the ELL/MLL students were within English Language Arts. The usefulness of the ELA data is more limited the lower the student's proficiency level. The NYS Math test, given in English, or in another language, or with low-incidence language interpretation, is used to evaluate the support that content area instruction has provided to ELLs/MLLs within the program. Content area tests, because they can be given to lower proficiency level ELL/MLL students, either in translation or with home language interpretation, where this may be appropriate, has more potential to offer valid information about student achievement in content areas, and thus be a reflection of the content area instruction within the program. The NYSESLAT is used to measure the progress students make toward English proficiency, and is useful as a means of evaluating the instruction within the ENL component of the student's overall education in school. Using the EDAT tool, the school can also identify any strengths or risk factors that may be considered alongside the standardized test data, to further assist in improving student outcomes. Factors such as insecure housing, or learning disabilities have an effect on test scores, limiting their use on their own. For this reason, the school uses the above tests in a holistic system, taking into account other sources of information, and non-standardized assessments, to evaluate the effectiveness of the program offered to ELL/MLL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use our Monday professional development sessions to look at student data, and to consider program effectiveness needs. Teacher teams, grade teams, and vertical teams all collaborate to determine the appropriate adjustments needed, based on the available data. In addition, grade team meetings are used to discuss data and potential adjustments to curricula, strategies, action plans, scope and sequence. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students who are current and former ELLs/MLLs are served in the English as a New Language (ENL) program. Services are programmed in accordance with the mandates required by the state, based on their ELL/MLL or Former ELL/MLL classification. Current ELL/MLL students are those at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of English proficiency, according to either the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL), or the NYSESLAT. Former ELL/MLL students served by ENL for two years after receiving the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT. In accordance with Chancellor's Regulations Part 154, the above-mentioned students receive the following mandated services, aligned to their English proficiency levels and classification: Integrated ENL, and, where required, Stand Alone ENL. Integrated services are provided in the student's ELA and/or Content area classroom by the teacher of that subject area and the ENL teacher, who collaboratively plan and co-teach the regular curriculum, with specific attention to the needs of the ELL/MLL students present in the class. It's goal is to support academic work in the students' regular curriculum. Stand Alone services are only provided to students at the Entering and Emerging by mandate, and to Transitional level students as per teacher judgement. Stand Alone services are limited to those needing support for early acquisition of English. Students at the highest level of English proficiency, Expanding are never provided Stand Alone, nor are Former ELL/MLL students. Stand Alone is used for specific language development activities to support the student at early and intermediate levels of English. Support focuses on development of new language oracy and literacy, including new language vocabulary, syntax, everyday idiomatic expressions, and discourse styles used in English. Instruction also introduces important cultural concepts necessary to help students integrate into their social environment. Students at every proficiency level, including former ELLs/MLLs have a minimum requirement of Integrated services. Stand Alone services are provided in a setting outside the classroom environment, where it is quiet, and students new to English can focus on language. Stand Alone may also be provided to students in heterogeneous groups of students across different grades and levels, depending on student needs and practical circumstances. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? This school has an ENL program only. Programming is done using the EPRG 2018-19 as a reference so that all students are programmed according to their state, English proficiency level requirements. In each student's case, 180 Integrated Instructional minutes are provided during ELA and in Content Areas, where permitted; where applicable, Stand Alone minutes are provided. Administration assures that the times when students leave the classroom do not negatively impact ELA instruction, by guiding programming using classroom schedules. Instructional minutes in HLA are not provided, because there are no families who have chosen a Bilingual Education program, and insufficient ELLs/MLLs to form one. Support in HLA is provided by supplementing the children's ENL instruction using the home language for support, by 2018-19 CEP 48  providing home language reading materials, and using home language literacy where possible. To the extent possible, home language oracy is also leveraged as a support for language arts and language development. Examples of HLA support include using home language labeling on visuals, auditory materials for listening, texts in the home language, and dialogue journals. At the present time, the majority of the students have little or no home language literacy, so the focus is generally on oracy with those students. With students who can read or write, the ENL teacher seeks that the parents be involved in supporting in collaboration with her since neither the classroom nor ENL teacher speaks Chinese, Russian or Bengali, the languages of the current ELL/MLL and Former ELL/MLL students (F-ELL). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All core content is delivered in English in the one program in the school, Freestanding English as a New Language. This program serves children in Kindergarten and Grade 1 only. Core content is delivered via Integrated ENL Instruction through collaboration between the ENL teacher, and ELA/Content Area teacher in a co-teaching model, as feasible. Different collaboration formats are used according to the needs of the students in each classroom. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher implement a co-teaching model that best matches the student needs and the classroom instructional structure at the particular time of day when the ENL teacher and classroom teacher co-teach. This co-teaching model is supported by collaborative planning during and beyond the classroom teacher's grade level meeting, as per agreements made between individual teachers. The purpose of the co-teaching is to involve both teachers in the instructional delivery, with each teacher contributing aspects of his or her professional expertise to enrich, differentiate, and individualize for ELL/MLLs, FELLs, and non-ELLs. The ENL teacher contributes ELL/MLL strategies and scaffolds, for both receptive and productive language adapted to the collaborative environment. Strategies may include using graphic organizers, or talking routines, modeling, visuals, or other such strategies. Scaffolds may include sentence frames, anticipatory sets, background building, or other scaffolds. The language addressed includes social and academic language, in the context of lessons. Social language is modeled on the spot, as needed, and academic language is planned for in advance, as an integral part of the lessons and tasks that must be addressed by students. Academic language is addressed at the word, sentence, and discourse levels, and includes attention to cohesion. It is addressed in both written and oral contexts. How the instruction is implemented is variable and responds to the lessons, units of study, tasks, and student needs, but is always done using research based methodologies. Classroom teachers, when the ENL teacher is not present, also support ELLs/MLLs with strategies that have been vetted through research and proved effective because the ENL teacher is not in the classroom throughout the school day. Instruction is supplemented with visual aids such as pictures and realia to support reading and listening comprehension, and pre-writing, and speaking activities, such as using graphic organizers, or speaking guides, for supporting language production in speech and writing. Both social and academic language are a focus. During activities, ELL/MLLs are supported in group work, partner work, and with one to one adult support when necessary and available. ELLs are taught vocabulary words with images or other supports, and these words are provided as they may be needed for academic tasks; concept sorts, picture dictionaries, number lines, alphabet strips, and other supports are also used. Assessments are differentiated based on the child's language development and age. For example, during spelling tests, only certain phonemes are assessed (beginning sounds, beginning consonant blends), based on age and standards applicable to the grade. Assessment information is analyzed from a perspective accounting for the ELL/MLL's English proficiency level, using the Bilingual Common Core Progressions (BCCP). Written assessments are evaluated solely based on content and focus, from the ELA perspective, and from an ENL perspective, syntax, conventions and sentence structures are assessed using the BCCPs.. For reading decoding and fluency, in early childhood, all students are supported in decoding sightword books and in applying new vocabulary words into predictable, decodable sentences. In second grade, ..... In math, students are supported by a partner in producing grade-level work. Science and Social Studies are made accessible based on real life experiences. 2018-19 CEP 49  Students are facilitated to have one or several "buddies" who speak the home-language to translate when necessary, and to socially interact with culturally similar students. Students are also given opportunities to write in home language. In Stand Alone instruction, relevant content forms the basis for language-focused instruction, informed by observations made during ENL instruction, and by formative ENL assessments, in order to support student participation in core content instruction. Stand Alone is implemented with students at early English levels of proficiency, as per the EPRG. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are given opportunities throughout the year to access materials in their home languages, and to incorporate their home languages into work, as they are able. To the extent practicable, information about the home language abilities in each modality is sought. Since the ENL teacher does not speak the home languages of the ENL students, (Russian and Mandarin), a person on staff, a parent, or a volunteer who speaks the home languages of the students are recruited to provide feedback to the ENL teacher with regard to the students' home language abilities. The ENL teacher, as able, also consults with outside sources among people she knows who speak the home languages, who can also provide feedback. Following the feedback, this observational data are offered to those working with ELLs/MLLs, as a form of assessment, so that students are seen more fully as emergent bilinguals/multilinguals, rather than through a monolingual perspective. The home language is not actively or formally taught in an ENL program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For SIFE Students: All teachers differentiate instruction based on the needs of individual students. Multiple data points are collected and used to determine the individual needs of the students. Consultation with the ENL teacher to determine what the most effective differentiation strategy would be, is an integral part of the decision-making process. The ENL teacher, using home language assessments in both literacy and content, assists to form a plan to develop the SIFE student in those areas. The ENL teacher also assesses the need of the SIFE student to acclimate to formal schooling because SIFE students have either never been to school, have large gaps in schooling, or have experienced schooling in contexts that are drastically different than the typical school in the U.S. (e.g. in a rural, multi-age setting, or in a refugee camp). Using techniques and methods such as anticipatory sets in the home language, visuals, role play, use of artifacts, Total Physical Response, explicit modeling, direct instruction, audio-lingual method, socially interactive, project-based learning with same language partners, creation of identity texts, among others, the SIFE student will be supported to engage in meaningful school learning experiences. For Newcomers: All teachers differentiate instruction based on the needs of individual students. Multiple data points are collected and used to determine the individual needs of the students. Consultation with the ENL teacher to determine what the most effective differentiation strategy would be, is an integral part of the decision-making process. For newcomers, because they are either young, entering school for the first time, or older but have consistent formal schooling, the planning process will be a bit different from that of the SIFE student. Assessment in both languages will be done, to gauge the students' ability in literacy, knowledge and skills in content, Home language academic language, and social and academic English experience. Plans will be collaboratively created from this data. Plans will include introduction to the school, so that students can be made aware of some practices that may contrast with their previous schooling, and the school building, staff, and routines will be introduced. Using techniques and methods such as anticipatory sets in the home language, home language literacy activities, home language content instructional support (materials and supplemental instruction or volunteer support), visuals, role play, use of artifacts, Total Physical Response, explicit modeling, direct instruction, audio-lingual method, socially interactive, project-based learning with same language partners, among others, the Newcomer student will be supported to engage in meaningful school learning experiences. For Developing ELLs: All teachers differentiate instruction based on the needs of individual students. Multiple data points are collected and used to determine the individual needs of the students. Consultation with the ENL teacher to determine what the most effective differentiation strategy would be, is an integral part of the decision-making process. For Developing ELLs, 2018-19 CEP 50  general focus areas will continue to be the building of social and academic language. This includes emphasis on vocabulary at all three tiers, lengthening of spoken utterances, and written sentences, modeling and practice in gradually increasing levels of complexity, idioms, among others, as identified by data. Developing students also need continued support to acculturate, so another focus area will be to build background information for students to connect to both their social and academic learning contexts. Many of the aforementioned techniques and methods are also relevant and appropriate for the Developing ELL/MLL, and they will be used as needed; at this level more English language literacy and oracy is expected to be used in instruction, but students who can use their home language usefully may still use home language materials to enrich background knowledge and strengthen literacy and oracy overall. For Longterm ELLs: All teachers differentiate instruction based on the needs of individual students. Multiple data points are collected and used to determine the individual needs of the students. Consultation with the ENL teacher to determine what the most effective differentiation strategy would be, is an integral part of the decision-making process. Long-term ELLs have been found by research to be a widely variable group of students, to such a degree that even the category itself is problematic in terms of defining these students. That being the case, it is important to look at the student's histories, literacy development, and current circumstances to understand better why they have not yet acquired sufficient English to be deemed proficient, and beyond that what they may need. Once this is done, plans can be individualized. Instructional techniques, methods and strategies will be highly dependent on the outcome of the analysis, but overall must address academic language. Academic language is one of the most important aspects of English that LT ELLs need to succeed. Academic language should focus on word level, sentence level, and discursive level English so that students can more effectively read and understand subject area text, and produce both academic writing and speech in an academic setting. For Former ELLS: The school offers integrated content with the ENL transitional supports. Currently, there is one former ELL and the student is a speaker of Begali as a home language. This student is in second grade. He receives two periods per week of ENL transitional supports (90 min/week), during literacy and science. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to work on the student's need areas: academic literacy and oracy, areas of language form not yet firmly established, and other needs, within grade level instruction. Instruction is differentiated based on the need of the individual student. Multiple data points are collected and used to determine the needs. Instruction for Former ELLs emphasizes fine tuning of the attributes of academic language mentioned above to promote continued growth in these areas, and offers support in any gap areas that may include cultural, social, or linguistic gaps. Whole class instruction, small group instruction, and one-to-one support are all used as teachers determine are necessary and appropriate. Some ELL/MLL methods used at earlier levels may or may not be needed but are decided upon as the data suggest. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At this time, none of the ELLs/MLLs are SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? NA 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At this time, none of the ELLs/MLLs have been identified for intervention services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? TAG Scholars is a culturally and linguistically diverse school. Data (in rounded percentages) show that 102 students in TAG (17%) speak home languages other than English. This includes, in descending order, 53 (9%) Begali speakers, 32 (5%) speakers of Chinese languages, of which, 15 (3%) speak various Chinese languages (for example Shanghainese, or Cantonese), and 17 2018-19 CEP 51  (3%) speak Mandarin. There are also 6 students (1%) who speak Spanish, 4 students (.7%) who speak Russian, and 2 students (.3%) who speak Nepalese, and Turkish, respectively (one speaker of each language). There has been interest expressed in programs in languages other than English, by families. Currently there is a Spanish foreign language program serving students from third grade to eighth grade. This program includes students proficient in, at least oral Spanish, and including at least one somewhat literate in Spanish as well, who was educated in Dual Language prior to coming to TAG; it includes others for whom Spanish may be a heritage language, but for whom it is not a home language. Data on these student attributes is not available. What is known suggests that a family survey could reveal these details and that this information could be used to improve the instructional delivery by making it more responsive to current student experiences and knowledge passed down in families, due to heritage. The Spanish foreign language program is also popular with people for whom Spanish is entirely new. Interest has also been expressed in having programs in Mandarin, by Chinese language speaking families. This interest will be explored in order to determine whether Mandarin can be offered to children of families interested in this language. Lastly, given the largest group of speakers of other languages is the Begali speaking group, possible enrichment programs will be explored specific to this linguistic and cultural group as well. Beyond languages other than English, TAG Scholars includes students from a broad spectrum of English speakers' speech communities, and from a broad spectrum of religious backgrounds. These attributes are likely to be illuminated as the school becomes more responsive to its language diversity. This possibility has implications for enrichment throughout the school as more teachers embrace the linguistic and cultural funds of knowledge students bring to the classroom. At this time, while there is no specific goal, TAG leadership will consider the above benefits as they seek ways to improve school programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs/MLLs in TAG are fully included in all programs because they are integral members of grade level classes. This means they participate in all curricular programs with their English proficient peers. Just as this is the case, the same is true for after school programs. All ELLs/MLLs are equally eligible to participate in after school programs, with their English proficient peers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently, only grade level available materials, both print and on-line are used. Materials are customized and printed by the ENL teacher, or created using common classroom materials such as sentence strips and index cards. Chromebooks, laptops, and tablets are all available and are utilized where deemed appropriate. An effort is underway to identify and purchase specialized ENL materials. Among the desired materials are ENL basal reader programs, wordless books, visual banks for vocabulary and concept development, manipulative materials for interactive instruction, audio-visual software, listening center resources, cultural materials, and any other specialized materials useful for teaching Kindergarten and Grade 1 ELLs/MLLs, and for supporting Grade 2 F-ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Current ELLs/MLLs are speakers of Russian and Mandarin. None is literate beyond the ability to write his or her name. Support in these home languages is provided in ENL, to the degree the teacher can support them. One way the ENL teacher supports the home language is by including those languages in the environmental supports she can provide in the Stand Alone classroom, and by encouraging the same in the student's regular classroom through her collaborative work with those teachers. One example of such supports is to label objects in those languages, in addition to doing so in English. Another way support can be provided is to identify auditory supports, such as story-telling software in Russian and Mandarin for students to listen to at times deemed appropriate. A third way students will be supported in using their home languages is to collaborate with family members so that students can include words from Russian and Mandarin in their written work. Observations of the benefits of the supports to students, will be individualized because the degree of responsiveness and usefulness of the supports is likely to be child-specific. Administration, classroom teachers and ENL teachers will all observe informally, and provide feedback about, the use of these supports by children, to determine how they benefit, or how they can be changed or augmented. 2018-19 CEP 52  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Early childhood materials representing a range of abilities across English, and literacy, and content curricula are generally available in all Kindergarten and Grade 1 classrooms, where current ELLs/MLLs are students. This ensures that their instructional materials are appropriate for their grades and ages. The teachers are licensed early childhood teachers knowledgeable in the implementation of instruction at these grades and ages. The ENL program, as a new program, is currently without dedicated, specialized, materials. Efforts are underway to assure that age-appropriate, linguistically appropriate resources are provided so that the services in ENL respond to the needs of the students. The ENL teacher is a teacher licensed and experienced in educating ELLs/MLLs at the early childhood grade levels. This means that teacher is also capacitated to provide instruction to children at the Kindergarten and Grade 1 grades and ages. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Sharing of resources is addressed during building council meetings. In addition, the ENL teachers of all schools have the opportunity to arrange convenient times to collaborate to ensure that the needs of all ELL students are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our ENL teacher reaches out to the family of any newly enrolled ELL student prior to the school year beginning. They do a brief interview to determine the needs of the incoming student. The parent coordinator shares the names with the ENL teacher, as well as the guidance counselor. Together, the team arranges for general orientation for the family, to support understanding of school expectations, and to illuminate what supports may be available to the families and students, beyond t he school day. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language program offered to TAG students in grades 3-8 is Spanish as a Foreign Language. There is also a Latin program offered from 2 nd -6 th grades. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At TAG Scholars, it is understood that all teachers are required by the state of New York, to be prepared, through professional development, to teach ELLs/MLLs. TAG takes a multi-pronged approach to assuring teachers develop and reinforce knowledge regarding teaching ELL/MLL students so they meet the CCLS. From NYSED, "Consistent with section 80-3.6 and section 100.2(dd) of this Title, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development clock hours for all teachers prescribed by Part 80 of this Title shall be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners." TAG Scholars will support all teachers to fulfill this requirement in a variety of ways: 1) provide in-house opportunities to learn about how to support ELLs/MLLs in the CCLS that will be recorded on a professional development log, 2) share office of DELLSS emails that highlight opportunities to attend ELL/MLL and CCLS specific 2018-19 CEP 53  workshops, that will also be recorded on teacher PD logs, 3) raise awareness at faculty meetings, so that teachers are aware they must fulfill this requirement, 5) provide substitute teachers to cover teacher classes while at workshops, to support teachers to attend outside workshops focused on teaching ELL/MLL students to meet the CCLS, 6) partially/fully defray the cost of such workshops, as necessary. From NYSED, "For all Bilingual and English as a Second Language teachers, a minimum of fifty (50%) of the required professional development clock hours prescribed by Part 80 of this Title shall be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. All school districts must align and integrate such professional development for Bilingual and English as a Second Language teachers with the professional development plan for core content area for all teachers in the district." This means that these teachers (currently one) will also be supported in ways similar to the above to complete the required hours. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We use our Monday professional development sessions to provide the required amount of professional development. We bring in outside agencies, such as the Field Support Center, when necessary to help provide the professional development. In addition, teachers are encouraged to seek out professional development opportunities outside of school. Substitute teachers are provided if the professional development takes place during regular school hours. Agendas, sign-in sheets, and teacher reflection sheets are kept in the professional development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual meetings with parents will be scheduled and held. The ENL teacher determines when the meeting should be held. A minimum of 2 weeks prior written notice of all meetings will be given. The ENL teacher, the SETSS teacher (if necessary), the regular classroom teacher, guidance counselor, and translator (if necessary) will be present in the meeting to discuss goals, language development progress, language proficiency, and any other items that are deemed vital to the student's progress. Sign-in sheets and agendas will be kept for all meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We invite all parents to participate in all activities. We invite parents into open school to observe in the classroom. We offer parent workshops, Town Hall meetings, awards ceremonies held at the end of each marking period, as well as individual meeting with parents and school personnel. Our PTA organizes several school-wide student and parent events throughout the year. Invitations are sent to all families in the preferred language. Our parent coordinator and ENL teacher also organize activities, events, and workshops for the parents of ELL students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janette Cesar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: TAG Young Scholars School DBN: 04M012 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Janette Cesar Title Principal Jonathan Dascal/Jennifer Cosme Assistant Principal Daniel Johnson Parent Coordinator Juliet Luther, Biled, ESOL ENL/Bilingual Teacher TBD Parent Gabrielle Arabia, Grade 1 Teacher/Subject Area Miguelina Castaldi, Spanish Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Michelle Yrigoyen School Counselor Alexandra Estrella Alice Cohen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/19/18 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/19/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: TAG Superintendent: A DBN: 04m012 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Daniel Johnson Jonathan Dascal Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS reports are used to identify the home language. In addition, we use information gathered by the students, teachers, parents, and any other available resource to determine the language that parents prefer to have their communication in. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 58  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Russian Nepali Mandarin Chinese Bengali Balante Arabic 8 1 0 0 23 26 1 1 0.81 0.1 0 0 2.34 2.64 0.1 0.1 9 1 1 3 20 26 1 2 0.91 0.1 0.1 0.3 2.01 2.64 0.1 0.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Monthly activities calendar , September-June, monthly. Parent/Teacher conference announcements November, March, and May testing information and dates October, March, April, May, June graduation/moving up information. October, March, April, May, June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Google translation, bi/multi-lingual staff to translate, DOE translation services Google translation, bi/multi-lingual staff to translate, DOE translation services Google translation, bi/multi-lingual staff to translate, DOE translation services Google translation, bi/multi-lingual staff to translate, DOE translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 59  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Mandated Parent/Teacher conferences November and March Family nights May Tuesday afternoon Parent Communication time As needed throughout the school year Curriculum Conferences September provide interpretation service(s)? Staff who can speak the language will help translate, DOE translation services, Google translation Staff who can speak the language will help translate, DOE translation services, Google translation Staff who can speak the language will help translate, DOE translation services, Google translation Staff who can speak the language will help translate, DOE translation services, Google translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has a robocall system that provides translation. Using Google translation to help record voice messages and send out mass emails/communication. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During a staff meeting, all staff will be given Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. We will discuss the ramifications, talk about what we currently do to ensure that communication with families is occurring in their preferred language, and as a staff, develop an action plan to ensure that this continues and improves. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator will be the first point of contact for parents. If the parent requests, we will provide both written and verbal translation and interpretation services. The school will use any available resources for translation services, including staff members who are fluent in the parent's home language, DOE-provided translation services, or if necessary, outside translation services will be utilized. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Both written and on-line surveys to gather feedback will be implemented. 2018-19 CEP 61 
