2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M018 School Name: P.S. 018 PARK TERRACE Principal: CONNIE MEJIA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 18 Park Terrace 310600010018 K-8 School Number (DBN): 06M018 4124 Ninth Avenue, New York, New York 10034 917-521-2220 Phone Number: 212-304-1423 Fax: Connie Mejia Cmejia4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Connie Mejia Erik Arnesen Alma Ramirez Melissa Ortiz Mayra Jimenez N/A Geronimo Ruiz District Information Geographical District: 6 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, 4 th Fl., New York, New York 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Fl., New York, New York 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Connie Mejia Erik Arnesen Alma Ramirez Natasha Prensa Mayra Jimenez N/A N/A Erik Arnesen Dana Levine Melissa Ortiz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ K-2 Member/ 3-5 Member/ Member/6-8 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) YanildaRodriguez Angelina Flores Maria Almonte Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement?  PS/IS 18M is committed to providing quality education to all students, including bilingual and special education students, by meeting their intellectual, social and emotional needs, and working diligently to implement a high academic standards-based curriculum. We are dedicated to utilizing the resources of our parents, professionals and community, to create lifelong learners in an environment that fosters and challenges ever growing minds.  One of our biggest marks of improvement last year was the 20% jump in returned Learning Environment Surveys from the families. We are focusing on providing our educational community with more resources and 2018-19 CEP 9  partnerships to enhance the overall school experience. The Framework for Great Schools emphasizes creating welcoming environments for families and take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. We have done this through wellness opportunities, partnerships with local universities and the local high school. In addition, the staff welcomes, values, and incorporates families and the larger community into inclusive schools and classrooms. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Link to Community  Eastside House Settlement has partnered with PS/IS 18 to provide our 6th, 7th, 8th grade students and their families a balance between academic and social needs. This is done through after school clubs, tutoring sessions, and parent workshops. Service provided to participants include: o Social services: Weekly sessions o After school programs: •health & nutrition •robotics •art club •music •STEM •arts & crafts •dance • creative writing • college and career readiness •homework o East Side House Settlement offers parents of participants’ social services, counseling, and classes leading to a GED, should one wish to avail themselves of this opportunity.  Students in grades Kindergarten through grade 5 participate in the Children’s Arts and Science Workshops. These activities include: •science • math •literacy •art •health • gym •homework •robotics •dance  We also have a partnership with LINC. Our grade 8 students have been paired with a 2nd grade student, and work together as “Reading Buddies.” For the older students, this provides a venue for community service. For the younger children it is an opportunity to strengthen their literacy skills. It also provides a means of building their social skills as participants develop special relationships with their “Reading Buddy.” The program includes a component to prepare parents to become reading tutors.  PS/IS 18 participates in the Integrated Arts Program sponsored by the Society of the Educational Arts (SEA). Selected 3rd through 8th grade students participate in either a 20 week, 2-1/2 hour theater or dance workshop. This culminates in a dance recital and dramatic production. Also provided is the opportunity to attend a professional theater experience. Productions are bilingual, providing our ELL population with the opportunity to retain their native language skills (Spanish/English).  We have partnered with the SAG Foundation - Book Pals. Trained volunteers that have been fingerprinted and had background checks. The Pals will work with grades K-3, with two classes per week, a half hour at a time, for ten weeks. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Setting Approximately 20% of the students have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) and receive the full continuum of special education services including Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes and other models of integrated inclusion classes, instruction in 12:1:1 self-contained model of instruction, and approximately 72% of students receive related services such as speech and language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. Additionally, 40% of the students are English Language Learners (ELLs), with Spanish as the dominant language within the school community. 3% of ELL students within our school are also Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). Approximately 100% of students qualify for free lunch and 0% students qualify for reduced lunch. Approximately 23% of Students are in Temporary Housing (STH). To this end, PS/IS 18 is Title I eligible and Title III eligible. 2018-19 CEP 10  The average student attendance for 2015-2016 was 95.1%. The number of suspensions (Principal) for our school in 2015-2016 was eight. The number of suspensions (Superintendent) for our school in 2015 was seven. PS/IS 18 is staffed with a team of highly qualified professionals who ensure that academic needs are met, as are social and emotional concerns. Approximately 71% of teachers at PS/IS 18 are deemed to be Highly Qualified in their area of assignment in core subject areas. The percentage of teachers holding a Master’s Degree or Doctorate is 78%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year.  Though faced with many challenges, PS/IS 18 is rising and meeting those challenges. One such challenge is the fact that our budget has been cut once again. As a result, we have reached out to the community organizations to obtain services to support and enhance our programs. As a result, our arts program now includes a partnership with Rosie’s Theater Kids. Participants have the opportunity to attend Broadway productions as a part of this literacy activity. Society of the Educational Arts provides a similar experience for our Spanish speaking students. We also offer the Urban Arts Program, a partnership that integrates Literacy and Arts for ELLs.  We have had many successful endeavors. As we meet (administrators and teaching staff) to analyze data, we look to refine our curriculum. One example is that we chose Ready Gen as our literacy program. We also opted to keep “Accountable Talk” and independent reading and guided practice from the Teachers College program. This strategy has proven successful for us. When new materials are necessary, only research-based programs are considered. Teachers are included in the final decision.  Engrade - Teachers post student progress on Engrade. Students are given passwords for access and workshops are offered to help parents navigate this online program.  Waterford is implemented across K-2 classrooms. This program focus is on three literacy strands: phonics, word recognition, and comprehension. Parents receive monthly progress reports.  Kindergarten to grade 2 classes are also working with the support and guidance of a Literacy Coach. The focus is on fluency and comprehension. Our plan is to also have joint PD sessions with our sister school, PS/IS 278.  Our focus this year will be on refinement – refinement of curriculum and refinement of teacher teams. This is a priority undertaking as we move toward improving the educational experience and academic gains in achievement on standards tests made by our students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M018 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 353 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 32 31 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 36 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 89.8% % Reduced Lunch 32.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 96.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.89 4% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 4 4 93.4% 2.3% 21.0% 2.0% 0.3% 0.0% 2 29% 7.5 27.4% 37% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we have identified a high need for improvement of informational writing across content areas. Data sources we analyzed as a school would include samples of student writing against a rubric in both informational and persuasive, on open-ended responses as part of end of unit writing tasks also measured on a rubrics. Strengths and strategies used: We used the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, and decided to target three areas. 78% (Instruction) (S) Sudents learn a lot from feedback on work 66% (PD) (T) Teachers want opportunities to learn from other schools 66% (P) Parents responded that since the beginning of the year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (events, helping in rooms, etc.) Curriculum maps by unit-common planning procedures (current unit maps). •Discussion prompts-language standard addressed through rich discussions and debates. •DOK system of creating objectives supported by language objectives. •School generated rubrics for informational and persuasive writing in both Spanish and English. •Socratic circles teacher student reflection sheet. Use the information from the observations to create cycles of PD topics, group staff accordingly, go back and visit them with a specific lens based on the professional development workshops. 2018-19 CEP 13  The school gave baseline assessments at the start of the year. Teachers and admin analyzed the data, to find patterns. This helps identify needs of strengths, tailor instruction, and differentiate for grouping. Teachers created a list of students for extra tutoring, support and also provide retakes and additional opportunity for learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all student in grades will improve two levels on a four point informational writing rubric. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Structured calendar-pre, mid, post assessments that include writing prompts for informational writing K-8. The staff is given a calendar for assessments and dates each month. Integration of TC Writers Workshop Model-Guide Writing Periods.  Monthly on prompt writing across grades and subjects for informational writing to be used for Teacher Teams. Professional development using NYS aligned rubrics, particularly the informational writing rubrics, to articulate student use of the rubric to self-monitor. Teachers and teacher assistants work together on PD topics related to observations for the purpose of professional growth. The PD teams presents at the conclusion of every cycle. On a weekly basis, engage in peer to peer feedback to review student writing samples. This will be done via PLC and Teacher Team sessions. K-8  Monthly review of student writing samples during PLC and Teacher Teams for collegial review. K-8 9/18-1/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 1/19-3/19 3/19-6/19 Three cycles to measure growth (schoolwide assessment) 9/18-1/19 1/19-3/19 3/19-6/19 Three cycles to measure growth Parental communication system through progress reports, Teacher Ease, and DOJO. Outreach will continue to be in the families' home language, and meetings will continue to be translated for all constituents. We will increase the methods of parental outreach by using social media and the frequency of the usage. Support of K-2 Literacy Coach-Push in PD and coaching sessions based on balanced literacy.  Monthly Teacher Ease progress reports to communicate parent information. K-8 9/18-1/19 1/19-3/19 3/19-6/19 Three cycles to measure growth Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, K-2 Coach Teacher walkthroughs to assess best practices sharing of best practices using a system for scheduling participation of teachers Classroom teachers, K-8 9/18-1/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent 2018-19 CEP 15 and identify next steps as part of teacher collaboration. Staff members visit classrooms for the purpose of sharing best practices and becoming more collegial. Teachers work and plan together and also have vertical planning. The teachers work to support their students to help them work towards meeting the CCSS. The teachers will gather resources that create a variety of entry points, so that all learners can achieve. Additional materials will be purchased to support this work, and it will also be suitable for ELLs and SWDs.  Monthly teacher intervisitations and collegial walkthroughs to identify best practices and support of effective teacher. Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 1/19-3/19 3/19-6/19 Three cycles to measure growth 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to participate in school tours during instructional time. Parents will also take part of teacher led trainings focused on school’s core beliefs. Parents will be exposed and engaged with our school’s curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Title I funding and Tax Levy will be used to fund an F-status staff member to support planning and implementation of information or writing assessments administered twice a year. ● Tax Levy and Contract for Excellence (C4E) funding will be used to support common planning time in order to provide teachers with time to review student work against the rubric. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a school, we have created an assessment grid by grade setting baseline (9/19/18), mid-year (1/29/19), and end of year (5/31/19). In addition, the following assessments were used throughout the school: pre-writes, Waterford, and Accelerated Reader. We also assessed grades 6-8 using Beginning of the Year (BOY) assessments in social studies and science. We used these measures when in conversations with the faculty meetings, in teacher team meetings and on an individual bases. In addition, this data is helpful in conversations with families. Teachers will receive the actual topics for informational writing across grades. In the assessment calendar, there are dates for submitting the data via Engrade and also using the Drop box. The Data Committee and the administration will review the student progress, 2018-19 CEP 16  follow up with staff, and determine we are on track to meet our goals. In January 2019, PLC and Teacher Team sessions will be focused on the importance of peer to peer review of student writing samples, using the NYS writing rubric. *Mid-point benchmarks will be administered by grade, using specific assessments assigned to the grade. For example, K-2 will use Waterford, F & P and Fundations. Accelerated Reader will be used to support grades 3-5. The middle school grades will use pre-writes and post-writing tasks, to assess the level of growth throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be assessed by administering two informational writing prompts as a pre and post writing assessment using a school wide 4 point rubric. Student writing samples will be analyzed by teachers during teacher team sessions looking for trends and specific strategies for improvement. Progress will be assessed by administering two informational writing prompts as a pre and post writing assessment using a school wide 4 point rubric. Student writing samples will be analyzed by teachers during teacher team sessions looking for trends and specific strategies for improvement. Pre writing assessment for informational writing (September 2018), mid-year writing (January 2019), and post writing assessment May 2019. Pre writing and mid year results to date have shown movement of 1 level per child and some already show 2 levels. We met and no adjustments necessary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 RYMA and the RRSA Attendance Reports. We noted that 80% of our students had attendance rates of 90% or higher. There is a need to increase attendance rate for the remaining 20% of our students. We are targeting this particular group to 83% by June 2019. School Strengths: In order to help all of our students improve their attendance and to emphasize the importance of it as a school, we are committed to the following: certificates of acknowledgements & accomplishments  monthly celebrations   mid-year, end-of-year celebrations, and special award assemblies  parent collaboration - parent coordinator, family worker. Daily of parental outreach.  Strengthen the partnership with the ACS social workers, so that we can encourage the students and their families to improve their overall importance. Priority needs addressed in our goal.  implementation of school wide activities to further engage all students that include more parental engagement activities.  plotting of scheduling special events during low attendance dates.  identifying and promoting leadership to the students with chronic lateness and absence based on the monthly RRSA Report that we will be monitoring. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of a minimum of 3% in the attendance rate for students with a percentage of attendance 90% or less, as quantified by the end of the year data report. We will move from 82% to 84% in 2018-2019 This increase will be measured by monthly review of RYMA/RRSA Attendance Report. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development sessions to address effective teacher practices for behavior that include turn-key training by teachers to support a safe and collaborative environment. Base on protocols for section sheet follow-up. Common planning time to discuss implementation of school wide activities to foster increase of attendance. Common planning to address needs on analysis of section sheet data and plan further activities on noted low attendance days during the school year. Student Council-Student representatives input to address system of rewards and celebrations K-2, 3-5, 6-8 that include school wide recognition of our accomplishments and planned celebrations as a method of increasing attendance as a school. All teachers 9/18-6/19 All teachers 9/18-6/19 Students 2-8 9/18-6/19 Additional outreach by counselor, for students that have a percentage of 50% - 80%. Students 2-8 9/18-6/19 Calendar PD sessions by counselor, for staff, pertaining to social-emotional issues and attendance. All teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Families will be given surveys in order to identify needs and interests. These results will generate parent workshops and schoolwide events in order to support families and involve them in schoolwide events. Families will also be invited to schoolwide tours, parent read alouds with support from PA members.  Counselor from THRIVE will work with small group on social-emotional issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 19  ● Tax Levy money will be used to fund school guidance counselor in order to provide one to one support to teachers and integrate behavioral systems within student curriculum. ● Fair Student funding and Tax Levy monies will be used to fund the school principal in order to ensure implementation and support for a school wide system of behavioral intervention. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark set at January 2019, we will review our monthly attendance reports alongside our monthly school wide events to promote increase in student attendance rate. All classes have their attendance results posted on the main floor. Attendance Teacher will pull out reports in February and honor those classes in special assemblies. The Attendance Committee will meet each month to follow up on the various cases, to see if we can tighten our data and also encourage the families and children to make strides in improving their attendance. The reports are printed out and monthly and tracked. Based on the 2018-2019 RYMA and the RRSA Attendance Report we will go up 1% per quarter for students with a percentage of attendance 90% or less. This data will be quantified by the end of the year data report.  Analyzing the monthly RYMA reports with attendance teacher to identify the progress to date. (State the actual ATS report) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed by the review of monthly attendance reports by class and setting monthly benchmarks for classes in order to increase attendance rates. Attendance committee will analyze data on a monthly basis in order to gauge change in percentages. Review RYMA and RRSA Reports, Attendance Committees Weekly meetings to review chronic lateness and absence reports, continue schoolwide celebrations 90%+, and plan schoolwide June events. RYMA and RRSA Reports, Bi-weekly Attendance Committees meetings tracking 90%+, family worker outreach to families with 5 or more absences – targeting reducing number of absences. We met and Yes, reports to date have already shown a rise in numbers of students whose attendance is 90% or higher. No adjustment necessary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a collaborative team of educators, we have looked at our teacher needs assessment results for professional development topics and the need to expand beyond basic professional development sessions. This in turn identifying a need to expand teacher collaboration through establishing cycles of professional learning. Strengths: •Collaborative teacher teams and overall school climate. •Sharing of Best Practices through turn-key for training – part of school-wide systems. Data Sources: Mini-observation feedback, teacher surveys, teacher feedback, school wide feedback after mini-observations and walkthroughs that include teachers across grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Professional Learning Communities (PLC) in grades K-8 will engage in a minimum of four PLC cycles focused on specific topics aligned to advance results and teacher end of year conferences in June. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional learning cycles on a bi-weekly basis will be scheduled as per teacher selection and research. All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Counselor from THRIVE will provide PD to staff, regarding social-emotional issues. All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Feedback sessions scheduled in cycles for the presentation of teacher learnings and application of practice due to research. All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Using data from Advance, target teachers that need specific support, align their next steps to specific PD cycles, intervisitations, etc. All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Teacher Teams (Inquiry) - scheduled weekly teacher team meetings with a focus on analyzing student writing samples 3-8 and frequent assessments for student success in area of informational writing. Intervisitations scheduled focused visits across grades with specific template to document best practices articulation among teachers and next steps for refinement of informational writing rubrics. All Teachers 9/18-6/19 All Teachers K-8 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be part of schoolwide communication systems such as Engrade Class, DOJO and monthly parent workshops focused on teacher led professional development, teacher to teacher student support in analyzing student work followed by parent feedback. Parents will also be supported via Tuesday parental engagement and scheduled parental meetings on reporting student progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Fair Student funding and Tax Levy monies will be used to fund the school principal in order to ensure implementation and support for professional learning cycles.  C4E funding will be used to support common planning time in order to provide teachers with time to review cycle work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 – At this point, we will revisit data and adjust areas needing adjustments as per analyzing the impact of teacher team work and analyzing student writing samples and mid year writing assessments through collegial review on4 pt Rubric up to the post writing assessment in May 12, 2019. After the cycles of observations, the administration will revisit to see if the information gleaned in the PD has transferred into instruction. Also, the staff will go on intervisitations to see the cycles of PD in action, provide glows and grows to their peers and work collaboratively towards fine-tuning their instruction. The teachers will use a sample of the NYS exam and use the State rubric, so that we could assess what growth has been made thus far. By Feb. 2019, we will be on our third cycle of Professional Learning Communities (PLC). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team leaders by grade and across grades will collaborate to review student work samples measured against 4 point informational writing rubric and exemplars. Teachers will collaborate by writing effective feedback to students and administer same writing task in span of 2 months to gauge growth. Ongoing informal observations looking for trends, effective use of PLC learnings, planning next 2 cycles alongside teacher leaders cycle 3 curriculum mapping, and Cycle 4 differentiated again based on advance indicators that need attention. The assessments of retakes/redos and multiple opportunities for students to show what they know is vital to comprehending and retaining the instruction. The academic success should parallel the teachers' work in curriculum, instruction, delivery and be evident in the assessments. PLC pacing calendar aligned to Advance observation results. Cycles – plotted on PLC grid spacing out of dates to ensure minimum of 4 cycles. We met and Yes, to date February 14, 2019 – We are on cycle 3 of PLC Cycles of Inquiry. By June 2019, we will have 5 cycles – surpassing the minimum of 4. No adjustment necessary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of end-of-year summative conferences with classroom teachers in June 2019, there is a need for classroom intervisitations. This year teachers will visit colleagues with a focus on sharing of best practices in addition to modeling of instructional expectations. Strengths: •Strong collaboration as a school community. •Results-Teacher end-of-year ratings. • Strong professional development cycles-Teacher led and collaboration of colleagues in presentation of best practices. Data Sources: •End-of-year ratings •Summative conferences •Teacher feedback documentation of next steps for teacher support and individualized professional development plan for improvement •Engrade •Waterford •Accelerated Reader and End-of-Year (EOY) Assessments. Needs: •Increased collaborative work with assistant principal as second means of support for classroom teacher. •Increase amount of teachers in Highly Effective range based on effective feedback, hands-on support and modeling of best practices. The teachers will be working with Literacy Coaches, as a way to address the slow growth we have seen on our recent NYS ELA exams. The schedules have been designed to allow for vertical planning. As a result, we have middle school teachers working together, to review the CCSS, discuss strengths, patterns and next steps to address slippage, target intervention, and push enrichment for extended growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve our New York State (NYS) math scores in level 2 by 5% as measured by NYS math assessment. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development sessions focused on professional learning cycles – Teacher collaboration and choice of topic. All classroom teachers, paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Teacher team set up – Launching curriculum refinement by analyzing, and adjusting curriculum and maps for Ready Gen, Scholastic Code X and CMP3-Math Middle School, addressing specific needs of ELLs, SWDs and STH. All classroom teachers, paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Identify teacher leaders by cohort (K-2, 3-5, 6-8) to build capacity in planning professional development focused on 3C. All classroom teachers 9/18-6/19 Hire a math consultant to work with grades K-8. Focus is math fluency and curriculum alignment. All classroom teachers, paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 The K-2 Literacy Coach will help students solidify academic language and reading for meaning. This work should impact the language on the NYS math exams. All classroom teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited as part of SLT as participants in decision making alongside admin. Parents will also engage in monthly parent meeting focused on school related issues, instructional focus and schoolwide initiatives that impact student learnings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 25  ● Title I funding and Tax Levy will be used to fund staff to support planning and implementation of teacher intervisitations across grades. ● Tax Levy and Contract for Excellence funding will be used to support common planning time in order to provide teachers with time to review student work against the rubric as part of teacher team inquiry sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, we will improve our New York State (NYS) math scores in level 2 by 5% as measured by NYS math assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Implementation of tracking of student progress through Teacher Ease monitoring. Target Tier I intervention instruction target students identified for direct instruction. Math test prep materials – Saturday and afterschool assessments – ongoing (formative assessments). Tracking if target SS in math during PLC cycles of Inquiry.  Weekly assessments tracked via Teacher Ease to monitor assessment results in math.  Identifying progress of target level 1 students by Bi-weekly tracking on formative assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, we have identified a need for a continued alignment with our community based organizations in terms of instructional expectations and alignment with academic needs of our students. In addition, expanding parental engagement through CBO school wide events for families. Strengths: •Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor – Strong collaborative culture and communication with families. •Established newsletters K-5, sent out on a monthly basis to inform families of curriculum expectations and classroom events. •Connection with outside organizations that engage and involve our parents such as LINC parent tutors. CHALK – Cooking classes with parents and children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, As a result of the school environment survey parental question, “Have the opportunity to volunteer and support the school.” We will improve to a minimum of 71% in the area of parental involvement in school from 66%. This will be done by increasing the level of communication in regards to volunteer opportunities, school-wide events and participating class activities. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly parent newsletters aligned to CCSS by grade – Informational letter to parents – Home School Connection. K-5 Students 9/18-6/19 Monthly meetings with CBO coordinator and curriculum consultant along with classroom teachers to look at specifics in parental involvement in school wide activities and sharing of newsletters. K-8 Students 9/18-6/19 Organizing school wide celebrations and collaborative events with teachers and children’s families through our partnership with our CBO. K-8 Students and their parents 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CBOs - Children’s Arts and Sciences K-5 and Eastside House Settlement 6-8 Engage in parent workshops, weekly food pantry, student/parent assemblies, and quarterly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grants and awards from CBO and outsi2018-19 CEP 28  de organizations are already in place to secure the continued success of these programs. Tax Levy monies for the proper scheduling so teachers are involved in the planning and execution of collaborative meetings with 2018-19 CEP 29  CBOs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019, midpoint meeting with CBO directors, parent representatives and student representatives to survey success and needs for next steps. The survey results will be used to determine if we are on track to meet our goals. It will also be a time to refine our goals and determine the best ways to continue making strides towards progress. The parents will complete a parent survey in Feb. 2019. The results of the survey will be discussed during the SLT as well as next steps towards improvements. The anticipated goal is 50% of completed surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A survey will be created and used every 3 months to measure program effectiveness and feedback from students and parents to make necessary changes where applicable. Surveys will be reviewed by CBO director, Principal and Assistant Principal. Continue parental outreach and engagement in school wide activities, school tours - minimum 3 times a year prior to survey in March - open school to visits and review questions with parents, and advertise early January fliers and setup clinics for March. Parent surveys have been strategically submitted. The parent coordinator collects surveys and focuses on parental engagement. Surveys to date show increase of parents responding and attending schoolwide. Implemented additional parent workshops in Wellness and yoga. We met and Yes, to date survey results have been. No adjustment necessary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYSED Scores ‘18 RR/F&P K-2 Waterford Results NYC Performance Tasks Mathematics NYSED Scores ‘18 NYC Performance Tasks Teacher End of Unit Assessment Science NYSED Scores ‘18 Social Studies NYC Performance Tasks Teacher End of Unit Assessment NYC Performance Tasks Teacher End of Unit Assessment When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day.Intended after school program. Professional periods During school day.Intended after school program. Professional periods During school day. Professional periods Intervention periods Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Differentiated grouping, scaffolded tasks, modeling/interactive writing, use of manipulatives, visuals, realia. Small group by teachers, push-in, pull-out Guided Practice service providers Small group by teachers, push-in, pull-out service providers Small group by teachers, push-in, pull-out Direct Instructions Differentiated grouping, scaffolded tasks, modeling/interactive writing, use of manipulatives, visuals, realia Differentiated grouping, scaffolded tasks, modeling/interactive writing, use of manipulatives, visuals, realia Differentiated grouping, scaffolded tasks, modeling/interactive writing, use of manipulatives, visuals, realia Small group by teachers, During school day. Intervention periods push-in, pull-out Urban Arts Connection (SS) 2018-19 CEP 31 Teacher anecdotals Role play Small group Daily ilog information Writing Individual as needed One to One Pull-out Once per week Parental input and requests NYS exams Formal/informal assessments Interactive group work Three tiered system based on data and students deemed at-risk School guidance counselor Psychologist as per teacher Input Weekly At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) RTI-Support intervention Push-in - IEP, ENL intervention/enrichment Pull-out - IEP, ENL Clinics-ELA, Math, Science OT Speech PT Teachers 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 89 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services to our children in temporary housing would include school supplies and materials for support in day to day responsibilities. At-risk counseling during the school day, support for families from counselor, parent coordinator and administration in terms of outside resources and supports that include medical services and housing needs. Ongoing targeted intervention through small group instruction and immersion in all extra curricular activities that include after school program engagement. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS/IS 18 has Highly Qualified Teachers. Our K-5, monolingual and TBE teachers are licensed and experienced in different subject areas according to the subject they are teaching. Our middle school teachers are licensed and experienced as well in the content area they are teaching. Our Art, Physical Education, Music and Technology teachers are licensed and experienced in the subject they are teaching. Our self-contained Special Education classes’ teachers are specialized and experienced in their subject area. They also possess a license in teaching students with disabilities. In order to support all staff members we are embarking on a school wide initiative to acquaint our staff with effective scientifically based strategies for instruction as well as multidisciplinary planning and integration of curriculum areas. Retention of our Highly Qualified Teachers is focused on ongoing support of collaborative professional learning cycles. New teachers are provided mentors, teachers work in various committees and teams, and the administration follows up on progress and support. In terms of recruitment the school does outreach to local colleges, looks to utilize ATR staff, trains paraprofessionals as a pathway to become teachers, and works with HR personnel in order to fulfill vacancies. The teachers have the credentials and hire those who are in the process of hiring in the needed area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Based on a needs assessment provided to all teachers and staff at the end of last year of the beginning of the school year, the Professional Development Team determined what our professional development priorities would be for this 2018-19 CEP 35  school year. In that sense, the professional development plan for this year is outcome-based, and withdrawn from student’s data such as the analysis of student work, formal and informal assessment and instructional changes according to Common Core State Standards. The professional development Team presents these professional development sessions every other Monday. Teacher Teams meet as well on Mondays and alternate Tuesdays to analyze research and discuss a selected topic of choice for research in order to improve student performance and teacher practice. As a result, teachers plan instruction during common planning periods as they refine or make the adaptations necessary to the curriculum in order to target student’s instructional needs. Analyzing student work is part of the process. An example is that administrators provide professional development on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP). This is a research-based model of instruction that was adopted in order to refine mainstream teachers' pedagogy which in term will improve English Language Learners academic performance. Teachers attend professional development provided by ELA, Math and SIOP Achievement coaches at the District and Field Support offices. Professional Development is also provided at the English Language Learners Department with the focus on addressing the needs of ELL students in meeting Common Core State Standards, differentiating instruction, analyzing data to improve ELLs Academic and language instruction. In general the professional development provided to our teachers and staff is differentiated based on data obtained as a result of observations of teacher’s instructional practice, student performance in State Assessment and the needs assessment survey completed by all teachers. This professional development plan is geared to address the changes in pedagogy required to implement new Instructional Shifts, Common Core State Standards and core content curriculum. Paraprofessionals attend District 6 paraprofessional workshops. In addition, they work in weekly professional development workshops on topics that are connected to improving instruction in the classrooms. School administration will attend workshops from the District and CSA. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 36  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Meetings with parents, involvement with school counselor, open door classrooms so parents can wean away creating independence. Parent Coordinator is involved in meetings, in the classroom and sees families at arrival and dismissal to address any immediate concerns. Parents are given a monthly school calendar given access codes to Engrade. The Parent Coordinator hosts monthly workshops on a variety of topics as it relates to curriculum, technology, etc. In addition, parents are invited at anytime with our open door policy and our parental outreach on Tuesdays to address any concerns and for updates. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In June 2018, a MOSL Selection Committee, comprised of a cross-section of classroom, content and out of classroom, content and out of classroom teachers was formed. After reviewing the assessment choices the members met with their assigned teachers to select their assessments for 2018-2019 school year. In September, the teachers were given hard copies of the State Exam results, including NYSESLAT, as well as Spring Fountas and Pinnell (F & P) reading levels. All classroom and content teachers have been supplied with a laptop to be used for data tracking. Professional developments have been ongoing to train the staff with the various data systems and their capabilities. In an effort to streamline our on-going assessments and data utilization, a class data profile snapshot profile with baseline data has been distrusted to teachers electronically. They will continue to enter on-going assessment data in order to gain a deeper understanding of their students’ strengths and weaknesses as well as their teaching strategies. Additionally, a school-wide assessment calendar has been formulated. Our data team focuses on teacher cohorts to retrieve, analyze and engage in data discussions with classroom teachers. Assessment results will be reviewed and supported through teacher team meetings as we look at target groups. Teachers have input on their grade through teacher team meetings meetings, identifying focus of assessment aligned to school's core beliefs, multiple assessments are identified by grade based on baseline results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 37 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) section 5, part 4b section 5, part 4b section 5, part 4b N/A section 5a, part 4b section 5c, part 4b Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 252,123.00 97,412.00 21,710.00 0 2,620,182.00 X X X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 38   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 18, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 18 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; specifically on Engrade and DOJO. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding city, state and federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community;  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 40  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with special needs. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this Parent Involvement Policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: o actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; o engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; o ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and o strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; o maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families.The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of our parents, and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents.The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; o disseminate, collect, and analyze a monthly parent survey; o conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; o provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Quality Review Report, and Learning Environment Survey Report; o will host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on October 27 to parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings,with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening,to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; o o o conduct an Annual Title I Parent Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 41   hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events; in collaboration with our collaboration with our CBO’s;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  with the support of LINC, we will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress Action Plan to increase parental involvement and engagement:  Meet with SLT and calendar dates for parent activities posted on parent activities posted on parent calendar  activites. SLT survey will be generated and distributed to gather information on parent interests, suggestions for workshops and parental activities and talents.  Plan and schedule a minimum of two parent engagement activities per month in alliance with our CBO, police precinct and actual classroom teachers.  Awarded a grant to engage and support parents via workshops, ESL classes, computer training, and GED courses.  CBO - Creating parent calendar to reflect a minimum of two parent engagement activities per month. Calendar generated and distributed with schoolwide monthly calendar. Our school conducts the required annual Title I meeting in collaboration with our parents' association. Parents are provided with handouts and information in English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, parent coordinator alongside school principal hold open discussions with parents on schoolwide core belief, intervention methods and ongoing supports for children. Title I meeting also opens up the school for open classroom visits and parental engagement. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 18, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 42  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 1. using academic learning time efficiently; 2. respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 3. 4. offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 5. providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards; by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting was conducted on October 27 prior to the deadline of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. They receive informational packets.; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of Limited English Proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with Limited English proficient speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 43     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1. monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2. ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 3. check and assist my child in completing homework tasks; 4. read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 5. set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 6. promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 7. encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 8. volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 9. participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 10. communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 11. respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 12. become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 13. participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 14. take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 15. share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: 1. attend school regularly and arrive on time; 2. complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 3. follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4. show respect for myself, other people and property; 5. try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 44  6. always try my best to learn. CBO Activities:  Monthly calendar with a minimum of two parent engagement activities for parents.  Parent invites to engage in group activities as per topic of choice. Parent/child activities that include but not limited to arts/crafts, cooking, dance and book celebrations.  Monthly parent workshops and celebrations of student work. Celebrating accomplishments. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 100 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III After School Program will target approximately 70 ELL students who scored EN, EM, TR and EX English language proficiency levels of the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT in grades 2-8 or took the NYSITELL as they entered NYC public schools. This year we will include grades -2nd- 8th as we always receive newcomers and young children who are in need to enhance students' learning and behavior. In order to be successful, teachers need to prepare them with the academic and social skills they need. Our ELL population are a highly heterogeneous and complex group of students with diverse abilities, academic needs, and life goals. Teachers will need to know what skills the students bring into the classroom in order to help them strength their native language skills. It is our goal of the Title III and all of the teachers to continuously strengthen the listening, speaking, reading and writing skills; as all of our young ELL population will be able to participate in academic projects and discussions as they learn the new elements of a new language, such as vocabulary, phonological components, grammatical structures and writing. Our EN ELLS, (grades 2 and 3), the ENL teacher will teach them the basic skills in English using games, books, visuals, technology, ” Picture Dictionary; Explode the Code; Academy Language Mastery –Level AA Kit” in order to enhance the listening, speaking, reading and writing modalities. She differentiates by considering the students’ abilities, learning styles and interests. The ENL teacher has grouped her students in groups of 3 EN students and 16 TR/EX students. The 4 TR students and the 13 EX will work with “Teaching ELLs for Academic Mastery –levels B and C Kit”; where they will be able to comprehend key points of teacher explanations with moderate or minimal support; express a variety of personal needs, opinions, ideas, and more complex text supported by graphics or pictures; read increasingly complex grade- level text while relying on prior knowledge and context to gain meaning; to write to meet increasingly complex academic purposes with support and learned vocabulary. The math lessons are taught in Spanish as all students can benefit of prior education. Basic skills and concepts are reviewed; problem solving in steps; odd and even numbers; properties of operation; graphs; money counting, grouping, etc. The 4th and 5th gr. ENL students also were also divided according to the proficiency level. There are 7 EN students, 1 EM student, 4 TR students and 6 EX students. The TESOL licensed teacher is using technology with the EN/EM students. Students are enrolled in the Waterford Program, a researched based programs at all levels. This programs helps students mastering skills such as letter recognition, letter sound, segmenting; spelling,; vocabulary; offers educational games; different activities, songs and books. In math it helps students with number recognition, numbers and operations, shapes, graphs, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. The materials that TR and EX students will use technology by using short videos and graphic organizers to represent complex vocabulary and concepts. Verbal supports including words glossed in context, partner discussions that focused in part on clarifying key ideas of the 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information stories articles read. Teaching ELLs for Academic Language level D will help students express a variety of personal needs, ideas, opinions, participate in academic conversations with minimal or moderate support. In writing, the book “Write Time Student Handbook” the students will be able to read articles where they can write about their opinion and arguments; informative/explanatory where they can provide information about or explain complex events, processes, or ideas in a way that develops understanding at the topic from beginning to end. In math is in Spanish as students will be able to do their problems in math as all students can benefit of prior education. The teacher will review basic concepts; emphasize multiple steps problem solving, multiplication and division; decimals and fractions, etc. The 6th grade class has 3 EN, 2 EM, 6 TR and 7 EX. Students have been grouped according their proficiency level. The Special Education grades 6th, 7th and 8thhas 1EM in 6th gr. and 1 EX; 7th gr. has 3 TR, 2 EX and 8th gr. has 1 EX. The bilingual 7th gr. class has 5 EN, 2 EM, 6 TR, 7 EX. The 8th gr. has 4 EN, and 3 EX. Grades 6, 7 and 8 teachers are teaching in English and math in Spanish. The students were divided as per proficiency level. They are using the “Heinle Picture Dictionary Journal” for students which helps EN/EM students with basic concept skills such as: learning the alphabet, numbers, colors, shapes, money, calendar, grammar connection ( preposition of time-on/at; where questions with be, opposites; making a phone call, singular and plural, etc.). TR/EX students are reading informational sources to cite textual evidence to support their claim (opinion writing). They are also using the Write Time Student Handbook where they have to write about opinion and arguments after they read an article; informational and explanatory writing where they can create a carefully thought out organizational structure that presents facts, concepts, definitions, and other information in a way that develops understanding of the topic from beginning to end. In mathematics, students are reviewing rate, ratio, proportions, etc. Teachers also emphasize that in the classroom students should feel free to speak whatever level of language they can produce, that their contributions are always valued. In addition, they have more resources such as glossaries where they use to enrich student’s vocabulary. Therefore, the Title III after school program will continue to emphasize vocabulary development through content as vocabulary is critical to reading, writing, and speaking proficiency. The new program schedule will meet on Wednesdays from 2:30 to 4:30 pm beginning December 12, 2018 through May 15, 2019, or a total of 20 days , plus the previous month which started on November 7, 2018. The new hours will be 2hours per day for 20 days. The language of instruction is English or Spanish, according to the student needs. he license of the 5 teachers are 1 ENL, l TESOL, 2 bilingual common branches in Span. plus 1 bilingual Special Education teacher. Each group varies, and this year we decided to place the newcomers together accordingly with their reading skills, as some of these students can only read and write in their native language (Spanish), and we want them to learn English together. Some of our 2nd and 3rd grade ELL students can't read or write in their native language, but we want all of them to learn to read and write, not only in their native language, but to learn the basic oral skills in English; at the same time that they will be able to use their prior knowledge to express themselves in their native language. Newcomers in grades 3 and up who are reading and writing in their native language will be together learning English as a new language., ELL students in 3rd grade include 1 EN student in NYSESLAT plus the newcomers, and grades 4-8 students will be grouped accordingly with their level of proficiency. We are not including newcomers who will be grouped with their level of proficiency as other students who will continue to register throughout the school year or transfer from other NYC Public Schools and which levels will vary as per NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL. We will be able to teach the same grade-level content to students with varying reading skills. Another resource the students will work with is the “Differentiated Nonfiction Reading kit” from the Blue Star Education- A division of teacher created resources, which contains 20 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information units of passages and a CD that contains Common Core Correlations and the Enhanced eBook. The exception will be those new comers who are learning a second language (ENL) and we are teaching them the listening and speaking skills as well a the reading and writing skills. We will use teacher made materials, including visuals, dictionaries, phonics, Waterford and some other programs. The units of study of the “Differentiated Nonfiction Reading Kit” includes the same information which is written at three different levels: below grade level, at grade level, and above grade level. It provides all students with the information they need to respond to the provided assessment in order to check essential comprehension skills: locating facts, understanding vocabulary in context, determining sequence, identifying conditions, making inferences, and analyzing and visualizing the subject matter. It encourages writing in response to reading content. The topics cover the subject areas of science, geography, history, and language arts. This will enable teachers to engage students to work independently, small groups, or large group activities. At the same time that it promotes discussion opportunities for all students which are geared to meet Common Core State Standards. In addition, we will also integrate the updated version of 2016 - Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT which is fully aligned to CCLS and the Bilingual Common Core Program. It reflects all five performance levels (EN,EM, TR,EX and CM) for those students who need support for the next 2 years after they become CM. It integrates all four modalities: listening, reading, writing and speaking. The format is in black and white to reflect the look of the NYSESLAT. At the end of the program we would like to take all our ELLs on a trip either to a museum, theater or some other place where they will be able to put in practice all the skills they have learned and at the same time enjoy themselves. This year we have enough resources that we have accumulated from previous years plus the ones that we purchased this school year. We would like our ELLs to excel in learning English as a New Language. The EX students we want them to do well in the ELA test during Spring 2019. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III After School Program teachers will participate in an after-school per session study group using “Help! My Kids Don't All Speak English” by Nancy Akhavan and “ Raising Rigor in Reading “ by Douglas Fisher, Nancy Frey and Diane Lapp. Our Title III teachers will discuss key chapters and topics in which children are supported and nurtured in a particular atmosphere such as the three traits of collaborative language classroom: context (teaching and learning), content (curriculum and materials), and culture (students and classroom). These ideas and strategies will be implemented into their small groups of instruction. Students will also learn to read with a deep understanding about what makes text complex. Literacy Instruction for ELLs Pre K- 2 explores oral language development and instruction materials, word study, vocabulary, comprehension, writing , and home-school connections with young children.It gives realistic examples, lesson planning ideas, on line resources and reproductibles . The teachers will also share these ideas or strategies with their colleagues. There will be a total of three sessions. The teachers will meet together with the principal, Ms. Mejía, or Ms. McGuire on the first Friday of the following dates from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 pm. In addition, one tentative session session 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development on November 1st or 2nd will be curriculum planning for our ELLS as we will discuss the individual needs of our ELL groups. Tentative schedule for study group and topic: Topic Date Teaching Language and learning language; oral language development and instructional materials Nov. 29, 2018 Voc. Development. word development; Conferring; comprehension and writing Essential Teaching and Assessment Dec. 20, 2018 Putting It All Together: How to Develop Units of Study that Link Lang., Reading, and Focusing on Strategy Instruction; home school connection Jan. 11,2019 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III parents will be invited to three different workshop which will be held on the third Thursday of the months of November, December and January. Workshops will be from 9:00-10:30 a.m.These workshops will help assist Spanish skills and curricula strategies in order to assist their children with daily homework assignments and academic success. In addition, parents will be taught how to use Teacher ease our primary grading system. Parents can go on-line to view grades for and assignments on a regular basis throughout the school year. We strongly believe that the more resources and information provided to the parents, the more parents will be able to support and guide their children through the challenges they must overcome to be academically successful, especially with the new Common Core State Standards. During the monthly parent workshops we will provide strategies on how to use technology, as well as home and community resources, to help their children at home. Parents will go to educational trips in order to incorporate reading with social studies and as a life-long skill where they will be able to visit a museum and experience a learning opportunity designed to make history come alive; in addition, to sail down the Hudson River to the Statue of Liberty, viewing such sights as Ellis Island, the immigration center, One World Trade Center, One World Financial Center. In addition, we want parents who are facing challenges to positively impact the lives of their children with new experiences during these trips. Metro cards will be provided to attending parents to encourage attendance.Translation and interpretation will be provided to parents through a bilingual teacher who will be in attendance and will facilitate these parent workshops. Parent workshop topics include: (Tentative Schedule)1. What parents need to know about the Common Core Standards - ELA/Math/NYSESLAT - November 29, 2018 2018-19 CEP 50 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 2. Basic computer skills- Learn how to log into Teacher Ease in order to manage their children assignments and improvement December 20, 2018 CLASS DOJO - parents will learn how to join it and talk to their children's teacher(s) 3. Integrating technology into their daily life January 17, 2019 4. Any other preferred topic would like to discuss about. January 17, 2019 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name PS 18 Park Terrace Borough Manhattan School Number 018 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Connie Mejia Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jazmin Fernandez Alamo ENL Teacher/Subject Area Kathy Rubendall-Math Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Rogiers Sp,Ed. Related-Service Provider Victor Velez Bil. Teacher Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Donna McGuire Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Alma Ramirez Parent Coordinator Alina Reyes Field Support Center Staff Member N/a Other (Name and Title) Candida Cabrera- Bil. Coord. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 4 1 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 12 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 357 Total number of ELLs 98 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.45% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 1 4 1 2 1 3 1 1 1 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 5 1 1 6 2 2 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 10 0 0 0 0 0 10 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell to assess all our students in English Language Arts and in Home Language Arts (K-8). Teachers plan the literacy block based on the results for their own students, using the data to differentiate instruction based on students' English Language Proficiency.Teachers in Grades 3-8 also use Fountas & Pinnell to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. Students read one-on-one with the literacy teacher. This informs that teacher about fluency, accuracy, decoding, and comprehension levels. Teachers can then group students and supplement classroom libraries with materials as needed. For example, articles are differentiated based on the Lexile level. Students read about the same topic but at their own reading level. In all grades, instruction is aligned to the Common Core State Standards and ensures that students have repeated opportunities to access and use language in all subject areas. Our students in the self-contained monolingual classes receive 2018-19 CEP 53  push-in services provided by a licensed ENL teacher. In Grades 3 and 4, independent reading levels of students are assessed using the Carmel Hill Accelerated Reader Quizzes. The program will be expanded to grades 2 through 5 in the coming academic year. In addition , we have a universal Literacy Coach who serves our early childhood staff and students and for this school year 2018-2019 , she is training our staff in the universal literacy Initiative (ULit). tHe goal is to ensure that students are reading at grade level by the end of the second grade . The literacy coach is to provide supportive feedback , model , co-plan , and co-teach , as well as provide professional development . THe teachers have Reading, Phonics/Foundations and Writing . In addition , all K-2 teachers will be trained by Wilson/Foundations . Also the Reading Rescue Pilot program is implemented as a one to one tutorial for first graders . Teachers of first grade and a paraprofessional are trained in this program . In grades K-7 teachers of transitional bilingual classes plan their teaching in the students native language(Spanish) at varying levels based on students’ English Proficiency Development . Our teachers have attended SIOP ( Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) workshops , professional development where they were able to target instructional needs of ELL’S during after school intervention with a small group of students (grades 3-8 ) , which emphasizes vocabulary development through content areas , as vocabulary is critical to reading , writing , listening and speaking proficiency . In addition , teachers provide tutoring at least twice a week during the after school hours to those students who are having difficulties with a specific subject area , such as reading and math . They reinforce the skills students need in order to accelerate their academic achievement . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Entering students who took the NYSITELL examination revealed that all newcomers lacked English language skills and were placed in TBE in K-8. The NYSESLAT exam was administered in May of 2018. During the Spring NYSESLAT 2018 examination n, it was evident that our ELL population demonstrated significant improvement and growth for each of our students from grades K-8th in all four modalities (listening, speaking and writing ) .ELL students who became Commanding were (25%), while others showed improvement and moved to the next level.Out of 10 SIFE students , 5 achieved their goal of getting out of the SIFE status and 5 are still improving their skills and remained SIFE status 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school uses the AMAO tool to identify those students who are most at risk. We also identify which students have made progress (AMAO Objective 1) and which students have attained proficiency (AMAO Objective 2). There are currently 32 ELLs and 39 non-ELLs at risk level 5 or greater. We have 10 SIFE ELLs and 16 ELLs who are in their fifth or sixth year of service. These students are identified as in need of additional academic support. For each ELL student who scored below specific levels on the English language proficiency assessment, teachers differentiate instruction, select anchor text books to help close the gaps; they create intervention plans aligned to the academic support services, such as ENL push-in, that are identified. Teachers modify curriculum and use digitalized curriculum (such as iReady and STMath) to address the needs of those students who score at growth percentiles below 25% on the state ELA and Math exams. Staff development is used to analyze data and develop plans. The support services provided are aligned to the needs of the at-risk students. Professional development is aligned to the needs identified by the data focused on English language acquisition including best practices for co-teaching and strategies for integrating language and content instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the evidence, these assessments make a determination as to whether the student may have second language acquisition needs or whether the student's learning ability is the determinant factor affecting whether the students can demonstrate proficiency in English. a. A student may come from a home in which a language other than English is spoken. As a result we determine whether the student has English oral and literacy skills sufficient for the grade into which the student is enrolling. Interview the student in both English and the home language. Review student's prior work in reading, writing, and mathematics in both English and the home language. In the past, all students taking the ELE test and the Spanish Regents exam pass. b. School leadership arranges PD, inter visitations, and common planning highlighting best practices of teachers with 2018-19 CEP 54  ELLS. Additionally, teachers further implement the strategies acquired during these staff developments and collaborative meetings in forming groups as well as tasks and providing more targeted instruction for ELLS. Teachers meet in professional learning teams across grades and across subjects to plan and share best practices. c. The results of periodic assessments show that students develop fluency and decoding but are lacking the vocabulary necessary for comprehension. Students are having difficulty addressing the increasing rigor of the Common Core Standards as they progress through elementary school suggesting that students need to focus on academic vocabulary and the features of the text. We use cognates and teach content in native language based on the mandated minutes for each language acquisition level. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell, benchmark assessments, and classroom based assessments to provide data in order to identify and target students in need of intervention. Teachers continue to work with students until they show adequate progress in the targeted skills. Tier 2 interventions in K-5, paraprofessionals work with students who continue to struggle in identified skills.Tier 3 intervention for K - 5 is provided by a SETTS teacher. Our Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA per week. Our Transitioning students receive 0.5 units of study in ENL or content area instruction, and our Expanding students receive 1 unit of study in ENL or a content area per week. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Teachers use NYSESLAT levels and modalities to plan lessons that address the needs of all ELL'S. Formative assessments and informal observations are also used to differentiate and adapt instruction and to form groups. Depending on the student's language acquisition level, based on mandates, units of study in the home language and the number of units of ENL allocated per week are assigned to meet student needs. Based on the results of the Math and ELA scores, teachers will group students to provide academic intervention accordingly to their needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The structures that our school have in place to disseminate in order to make adjustments to our program are through baseline assessment test in content areas( English Language Arts, Math ,Science and the English Language Learners Baseline Assessment. These baseline benchmark assessment standardized tests are administer at the beginning of the school year and the end of the school year . This way we can compare and contrast the improvement of students in the content areas and the language demands in the English Proficiency Level Development .Also these results helps us screen and identify students in need of additional of instructional support .We collect and analyze the data from the state tests for Math, ELA, and Science to assess the progress of our ELL’S. We also look at the NYSESLAT results. We look for improvement in the four modalities and analyze progress based on the strands in each assessment. The information collection practices will support a valid and objective appraisal of program success for our ELL'S students. The use of observational information as well as a review of records is considered and appropriate data maintained so that the success of school programs can be measured in terms of student performance. This data is organized and arrayed in a manner that helps enable the school and district to evaluate student performance outcomes over time and to follow the performance of students after they have transitioned from ELL programs. These data also helps the teacher to plan lessons with measurable objectives aligned to the common core standards, where ELL students have the opportunity to have differentiated instruction, scaffolding and any other effective strategies that will guide and help students meet the AYP (Annual Year Progress)goals. Information collection sources may include: performance on standardized achievement tests; standardized language proficiency tests; English oral, reading, and 2018-19 CEP 55  written skills as demonstrated by grades in language development courses; year-to-year test scores; teacher observation; parental observations and feedback; records on length of time from entry to transition and/or exit from program; grades in core classes; and graduation rates. Longitudinal data can be useful in evaluating overall language development of ELL students. Disaggregation of data by students who are currently in the program and those who formerly received services but who have been determined to no longer need services may be particularly useful. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We do not offer a Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. The school offers from Kindergarten to Eight grade the Transitional Bilingual Education Program .<!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Students are placed in TBE classes according to parental preference. Students in the TBE class are grouped heterogeneously regardless their English Language Proficiency Development level. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not offer Dual Language 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As indicated by the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT scores our ENL’S proficiency levels Entering ( Beginning), Emerging ( Low Intermediate).Transitioning ( Intermediate) ,Expanding ( Advanced) Commanding (Proficient)English. Students demonstrating Commanding level will receive 90 minutes per week , those demonstrating Expanding and Transitioning levels will receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction and those scoring Emerging or Entering levels will receive 360 minutes, as per CR Part 154. Those students who have reached a Commanding level on the spring 2018 NYSESLAT exams will continue to receive ENL support through the end of the school and continue to receive extended time and other ENL accommodations on all New York State assessments for the next two years. ENL students have four push-in or pull-out ENL periods a week, and each ENL student also attends four small group Enrichment periods a week, with ENL and other content area teachers, to comply with CR Part 154 mandates. All ENL students receive 8 full 45 minute periods of ELA instruction per week.In grades K-5, Social Studies, Math, Science, and Technology are delivered in the home language. The literacy block is based on the Common Core curriculum using the mandated number of minutes per week. Teachers indicate in their planning the units allocated to students at each proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Literacy is taught using ENL techniques and tools using specific models of Balanced Literacy Program and aligned with the New York State Common Core State Standards. Math and other content areas are scaffold for ELL'S using ENL strategies and methods. Scaffolding consists of, but is not limited to: bilingual dictionaries, interactive word walls, charts, graphs, manipulatives, and pictures to teach vocabulary; strategy charts related to current units of study; textbooks and trade books related to the experiences and interests of adolescent learners, and inquiry based interdisciplinary projects to enable students 2018-19 CEP 56  to transfer key skills and concepts.For new comer students the school provides the Waterford program which enables the literacy skills in English from Kindergarten to Eighth grade.The curriculum is designed to promote reading, writing, and typing, incorporating literacy skills such as letter mastery, language stories, spelling, basic writing skills, reading and listening development, and comprehension strategies. It is used as a supplement to the regular reading curriculum. Program materials include classroom lessons and take-home materials in addition to the Waterford software. Waterford Early Reading Program offers pretest placement and posttest assessments, in addition to ongoing assessments throughout the program. ELL'S meet in their Enrichment classes to target Common Core vocabulary and concepts to help make the challenging content comprehensible. The Math and Science curriculum includes discreet literacy classes for targeted content area vocabulary development specifically with ELL'S in mind. The regular classroom texts and lab books are used during push-in sessions for content areas. Each of those content area classrooms have been provided with the Spanish versions of the texts, along with Department of Education Word-to-Word Glossaries for content area subjects in Spanish. ENL is taught using an eclectic mix of materials including student produced materials, their independent reading books, materials derived from the regular classroom curricula (scaffolded for ELLs and special needs students), various pedagogical resources, such as English at our Command, Reading Rewards, and many internet sources, for discrete topics in grammar, vocabulary development, and reading comprehension, as well as other effective strategies for some of our ELLS with special needs.Also this year the our school has integrated the STEM(Science, Technology Engineering and Math) program.STEM is a curriculum based on the idea of educating all students in four specific disciplines — science, technology, engineering and mathematics — in an interdisciplinary and applied approach. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->ELL'S are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by frequent conferencing, formative assessment, Fountas & Pinnell assessments, teacher observations and running records which provide teachers with data assessing ELL'S academic progress. Teachers use formative assessments to target listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Progress is also monitored through rubric-aligned writing tasks. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->1. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers use assessments in order to create differentiated instructional groups throughout the school day for all our students. Students may be grouped by ability, interest, learning style, or language proficiency for particular tasks. a. SIFE: Most SIFE students lack academic proficiency in their native language as well as in the content areas. These students are identified by the bilingual coordinator at the time of school enrollment. Although our SIFE do not have IEPs, teachers know that they will need extra support in order to close the gap between their performance and the performance of their peers in Spanish and English. Teachers differentiate instruction in order to support these students' needs. Bilingual teachers reinforce vocabulary development and writing mechanics in the native language. Monolingual teachers use realia and modeling to scaffold instruction for these students. Manipulatives are very useful during content area instruction such as math and science in order to provide visual and tactile support, as well as create opportunities for language usage. b. Newcomers: Newcomers are usually also addressed by the services provided to SIFE students. Teachers assess their prior knowledge and they receive support during the literacy and math periods according to their needs. Newcomers benefit from direct instruction, modeling, and instruction with their peers. As they are welcomed into the classroom, the teacher may assign a "buddy" or group of "buddies" to help the newcomer student learn the class routines and adapt to the school culture. c. Developing-ELL'S receiving services for 4-6 years: These students benefit from our reading program. We use Ready Gen Curriculum which focuses on Science and Social Studies standard-based topics. Units are consistent across the grades to allow for deep exploration of each topic and a true foundation of content area knowledge. In addition, students will read materials which allow them to read high-interest books at their own level in English and Spanish. Teachers frequently assess using 2018-19 CEP 57  running records (Fountas and Pinnell) and comprehension questions in order to identify their needs. They also benefit from having proficient peers in their heterogeneous classes who model language use. d. Long Term ELL'S: All of our current long term ELL'S struggle in most academic areas. They also benefit from the Ready Gen materials as well as classroom libraries which allow them to select high-interest books on their own reading levels. These students tend to prefer interacting and producing work in English. Teachers provide intensive test-prep instruction and practice for the NYS ELA exam and NYSESLAT. These students benefit from interacting with their English proficient and Spanish proficient counterparts. e. Former ELL'S up to two years after exiting ELL status: Our school has a large former ELL population and these students continue to be part of every program we offer. We offer programs such as Title III, ELA and Math after school program and Saturday Academy which help the students improve their reading, writing and mathematics skills. They also receive testing accommodations for two additional years after exiting ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Instructional Strategies/Grade-Level Materials for ELL-SWDs: At PS/IS 18, all students who have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) receive the full continuum of services needed including instruction in self-contained Special Education classroom and related services such as Speech Therapy, Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy and Counseling, S.E.T.S.S. (Special Education Teacher Support Services), and an I.S.C. team comprised of a Psychologist, Special Education teacher, and a Family Worker. The members in the IEP team meetings, are responsible for the development of the IEP, for creating examples of lesson adaptation and modification, behavior plans, and for training the general education teachers involved in the program in order for them to be able to carry out these plans. The S.E.T.S.S. teacher helps the general education teachers support all students in their classroom. ELLs-SWDs students will receive push-in ENL services from the licensed ENL teacher for the required minutes as per CR 154 Part 3 . The ENL teacher provides multiple entry points for task completion, as well as additional support through visuals, realia, and technology to make the content areas more accessible. Overall deficits in reading and Math are addressed through multi-sensory and highly structured instruction that pays attention to multiple intelligences, Blooms taxonomy, informal assessments, and the problem-solving approach to teaching students with disabilities. Teachers front-load background knowledge, use explicit vocabulary instruction, teach Latin roots and base words, prefixes and suffixes, and cognates. Teachers carefully scaffold texts and engage students in paired and small group using accountable talk. Students use graphic organizers and strategy charts, and process charts to write paragraphs. Accountable talk prompts are used to support academic discussion and peer evaluation of work using rubrics. Our school believes in the equity of academic services for all members of our academic community, especially English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. All teachers differentiate their instruction to ensure that all of the students in their classroom can access grade appropriate materials. There are a myriad of instructional strategies that our teachers implement in the classroom to reach these students. All teachers use assessments to create groups that will help solidify understanding for all students. ELL students are grouped heterogeneously when they need peer motivation and interaction. If they need more individualized attention, our teachers create homogeneous groups while working on interventions that help these students assimilate academic materials. Some of these interventions include scaffold and tiered activities that give students a step by step template for implementing skills that lead to enduring understanding. Some of these tiered activities are implemented to help them gain comprehension including author’s purpose, symbolism, figurative language, and other elements of English Language Arts. Graphic organizers are often a salient feature of these interventions. When they are used consistently, these repetitive strategies become solidified in the student’s repertoire of skills. In addition, the explicit teaching of vocabulary is essential for the academic milestones for ELL'S. Once students become familiarized with the academic language relevant to the texts associated with the tasks, teachers ask students to engage in academic conversations that demonstrate a mastery of said terms. SETSS provides: Specially designed and/or supplemental instruction to support the participation of the student with a disability in the general education classroom. Consultation to the student's general education teacher. These services are designed to be flexible, helping students to remain in the general education classroom and use the 2018-19 CEP 58  combined expertise of both the general and special education teacher. They may be provided within the general education classroom or in a separate location. Group size for SETSS provided in the general education classroom or in a separate location may not exceed a maximum of eight students. Our ENL and S.E.T.S.S. models for Special Education students typically provides for: • Six (6) students at a time when pulling-out: 8 when pushing in. • All instruction in English. • Provider circulates throughout the classes to support the IEP and At-risk students, assess needs, and evaluate progress as it relates to the individual student's IEP. • Provide one-to-one supports, direct instruction and assessment for Special Education students in general education classrooms • Adapt and modify curriculum through published and teacher made material 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S./I.S. 18, teachers supplement the ELA curricula using differentiated articles, trade books, technology resources to reach all ELL-SWDs and assist them to reach IEP goals. Teachers also can use supplemental materials for the Mathematics curricula using EngageNY, teacher-made materials, manipulatives and hands-on learning activities. All teachers have the freedom of flexibility with scheduling extra time for certain subject areas as needed for ELL-SWDs in order to meet their learning goals indicated on their IEP and attain English proficiency.In 2018 our school initiated the STEM program schoolwide which is a curriculum based on the idea of educating students in four specific disciplines — science, technology, engineering and mathematics — in an interdisciplinary and applied approach. Rather than teach the four disciplines as separate and discrete subjects, STEM integrates them into a cohesive learning paradigm based on real-world . For new comer students the school provides the Waterford program which enables the literacy skills in English from Kindergarten to Eighth grade.The curriculum is designed to promote reading, writing, and typing, incorporating literacy skills such as letter mastery, language stories, spelling, basic writing skills, reading and listening development, and comprehension strategies. It is used as a supplement to the regular reading curriculum. Program materials include classroom lessons and take-home materials in addition to the Waterford software. Waterford Early Reading Program offers pretest placement and posttest assessments, in addition to ongoing assessments throughout the program. ELL'S meet in their Enrichment classes to target Common Core vocabulary and concepts to help make the challenging content comprehensible. The Math and Science curriculum includes discreet literacy classes for targeted content area vocabulary development specifically with ELL'S in mind. The regular classroom texts and lab books are used during push-in sessions for content areas. Each of those content area classrooms have been provided with the Spanish versions of the texts, along with Department of Education Word-to-Word Glossaries for content area subjects in Spanish.The school offers Saturday Academy as an intervention program to support students needs in content and English language development areas . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers are given the freedom to create their own intervention according to the students’ specific language needs. They provide students with tutoring, one-to-one conferencing, and/or small group interventions in any subject area of need. All intervention is done in English. For new comer students the school provides the Waterford program which enables the literacy skills in English from Kindergarten to Eighth grade.The curriculum is designed to promote reading, writing, and typing, incorporating literacy skills such as letter mastery, language stories, spelling, basic writing skills, reading and listening development, and comprehension strategies. It is used as a supplement to the regular reading curriculum. Program materials include classroom lessons and take-home materials in addition to the Waterford software. Waterford Early Reading Program offers pre test placement and post test assessments, in addition to ongoing assessments throughout the program. ELL'S meet in their Enrichment classes to target Common Core vocabulary and concepts to help make the challenging content comprehensible. The Math and Science curriculum includes discreet literacy classes for targeted content area vocabulary development specifically with ELL'S in mind. The regular classroom texts and lab books are used during push-in sessions for content areas. Each of those content area classrooms have been provided with the Spanish versions of the texts, 2018-19 CEP 59  along with Department of Education Word-to-Word Glossaries for content area subjects in Spanish.The school offers Saturday Academy as an intervention program to support students needs in content and English language development areas . 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? N/A 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to participate in our school programs, with parent permission, including all after school programs – athletic or academic. Our ELLs are invited to attend the after school Title III program (which consists of small groups) every Saturday, from 9:00 AM to 12:00 P.M. In addition, we offer small groups for Saturday Academy for test preparation in ELA and math for all students behind in these academic areas, including ELLs. The licensed bilingual science teacher offers small group tutoring for test preparation on Fridays during regular school hours for the state science exam for ELLs in grades 4 and 8. Students are also pulled out two periods every day for ENL services by a licensed bilingual teacher in grade 8. Our ELL-SWDs receive ENL push-in and SETTS as per their IEP. Our ELL students receive mandated services and teachers model instructional strategies to target their individual needs during content area English Instruction. Science, Social Studies and Mathematics are exactly the NYSED'15, the criteria for determining the AIS services it is NYC performance tasks, teacher end of unit assessment and the type of program or strategy is differentiated grouping, scaffolded tasks, modeling/interactive writing, use of manipulates, visuals and realia. The methods of deliver for services are small groups by teachers, push-in, and pull-out service providers. Services are provided during school day, professional periods, and intervention periods and also intended after school programs. Social Studies is also included during Urban Arts Connection.At -Risk Services are provided by the guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, etc. The criteria for determining AIS Services are teacher anecdotes, ilog information, parental input and requests, New York State exams, formal/informal assessments. The methods of delivery for these services are small groups, individual and pull-out. The services are provided daily, as needed, once per week, as per teacher input. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to support ELLs, teachers use the following supplemental instructional materials: Interactive Time for Kids Magazine, Scholastic Jr., News ELA, CNN Student News, Khan Academy, PBS Kids, Brain Pop, Brain Pop Jr., Accelerated Reader, Power Dot Math (multiplication songs with visual support), Flow vocabulary, Front Row ELA and Math, Read Works.org, Super Teacher Worksheets.com, Ka hoot games, Science World magazine, Studies Weekly magazine,STEM,Waterford,Newsela,ReadworksIn an effort to increase the rigor, teachers use common texts for all students, irrespective of their reading level. The teachers focus on depth rather than breadth. This is an involved process that is lengthy, but well worth the wait. When students chunk the information and really take the time to process the information, they walk away with a wealth of knowledge, a sense of accomplishment and self-realization. This is an essential component of the educational process. In our school all students are expected to delve into grade level texts such as Ready Gen in the early grades and Codex in the upper grades. The pacing and structure of the instruction is modified according to the needs of our students. As a way of enriching their understanding, movies, songs, and visuals are introduced. Students are exposed to supporting texts that enrich their understanding of the common text. Often time, these supporting texts are gathered from News ELA or Scholastic. The wonderful thing about News ELA is that it classifies text based upon Lexile level. Since our self-contained special education classrooms contain a three grade bridge, this is of particular use to these classrooms because the same text could be modified so that all members of the classroom could access the text. Teachers are using homogeneous proficiency groups (Entering with Emerging,Transitioning and Expanding and the Commanding can be able as mentors to their peers in the other proficiency levels) within their ELA literacy period. Workshops for teachers in ENL and Special Education. ENL push-in services, pull-out programs, push-in SETTS. Small group instruction in Special Education classes 12:1. SETTS teacher pushes-in self-contained monolingual classes and side 2018-19 CEP 60  by side self-contained dual language classes. Students who have an IEP and attend a Special Education class and General Education. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->At PS 18 the in the Transitional Bilingual Program (TBE) students transfer home language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the home language before steadily transitioning to English. At the beginning,entering and emerging level, TBE students are expected to receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. As a student’s English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. In TBE programs, teachers must make several considerations when determining which language is best to teach certain concepts. Teachers must consider carefully the intellectual demand of concepts, student familiarity with concepts n the home language and English, and the academic language required for using and mastering concepts. TBE teachers are critical to Ells’ transition from home language to English since they serve as language models for both; therefore, they must demonstrate strong academic language proficiency when delivering instruction in either language. Successful TBE teachers help students cultivate a strong appreciation for reading. These teachers ensure that ELLs are familiar and comfortable with reading by helping them develop strong literacy skills in their home language first. Also, TBE teachers are likely to instruct students with various levels of content mastery and literacy development. While variations are similar to those found in general education classrooms, TBE teachers face the additional challenge of gauging and instructing students with different proficiency levels in their home language as well as in English. PS 18 promotes a two-language system of instruction. Students learn language concepts and knowledge in their primary language at the same time they receive instruction in English. Teachers build on growing language skills through the interplay of two languages. Instructional strategies and materials are used at our school to help students achieve successfully in their transition to a new language. Differentiated instruction, scaffold, common core aligned textbooks, dictionaries, graphic organizers, writing mechanics, technology resources, fix up strategies . In the literacy program we use Calle de la Lectura for grades K to 6 by Scott Foresman. For example one of the novel that our middle school students read in sixth grade is Becoming Naomi Leon by Pam Muñoz Ryan which is also in Spanish “Yo , Naomi Leon”. Another example is that in seventh grade the students read the novel Island of The Blue Dolphins by Scott O’Dell is also in Spanish “La Isla de los delfines azules”. These are differentiated ways in which students can comprehend reading in the language that they prefer without losing the context of comprehension and not giving up on what they read. As a student’s English proficiency increases more of his /her instructional day is spent learning in English. In TBE programs, teachers must make considerations when determining which language is best to teach certain concepts. They also must consider carefully the intellectual demand of concepts, student familiarity with concepts in the home language and English, and the academic language required for using and mastering concepts. Teacher challenge students to cultivate a strong appreciation for reading, ensuring that ELL'S are familiar and comfortable by helping them develop strong literacy skills in their home language first. In PS IS 18 the home language support is delivered in the ENL program by using the push-in and push-out model. The licensed ENL teacher pushes in working with ELL'S in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. As per mandate the pull-out program ensures that the students will receive the academic the academic unit instruction as per their proficiency level. Pull-out model: ELL'S who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL teachers need to plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. Both push -in and pull-out strategies the ENL students time is guaranteed according to their proficiency level .In middle school the licensed bilingual educator pushes in to give extra support to our ELL students. Materials used to develop the ENL curriculum are dictionaries, visual aids ,manipulatives, graphic organizers, aligned common core standards books , relia and many other materials that will increase the ELL students knowledgement. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL'S participate in all school programs and activities in a heterogeneous environment with EP students. ELLs receive supports to address their language needs. In order to be part of our after school programs, parents receive an invitation letter where they must agree that their children should participate in after school clubs such as volleyball teams for girls, basketball teams for boys, cooking classes (which parents are also invited), dance, debate clubs, arts and crafts, band, chess club, theater, robotics, science, math club, computer science, homework, remediation, etc. In addition, programs such Repertorio Español gives free 27-session classes for school students (grades 5 to 8). The aim of the program is to instill cultural pride, promote 2018-19 CEP 61  self-awarenes, and divulge the richness of Spanish language theater. Repertorio Español is committed to make theater accessible and part of the classroom experience. Our students have participated in the last three years in Repertorio Español classes where they learn to write their own theater pieces and to perform as artists at the end of the classes. Rosie's Theatre, an arts program provides singing, dancing and choreography. Students also receive vocal, piano and musical instruments lessons and they see throughout the year Broadway shows at the same time they do their own musical rehearsals. Their annual performance for the school this year was Annie. Another art program is Urban Arts which links the grade curriculum to arts. Includes field trips to museums, exposure to artists all around the world, explore themes of interdependence, social justice, etc. accordingly to the grade and the curriculum; uses visual inquiry to promote thinking, etc. These programs help ELL students to develop writing and reading comprehension skills by also creating critical thinking skills amongst our students. SIFE students were also participants in these programs which allow them to enhance their opportunity to reflect and improve in academically skills. Our teachers differentiate in order to support our students' needs helping them to develop the understanding and appreciation for live theater. This experience built their literacy skills, helping them become even more resilient in their personal lives. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We support ELLs from K-8 th grade build foundational skills in reading, science, and math with Waterford Early Learning and Reading Rescue that ranges from Kindergarten to second grade . In elementary and middle school, students have at home access to iReady. All of these programs are adaptive to individual students' needs. In the middle school, we are participating in a grant from the Department of ELL'S and Student Support (DELLSS) to pilot Smith, an intervention program that support visual learners of mathematics.Our classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards, as well as we are a google school to facilitate the instructional process. All students have their gmail address in order to do their work. ELLS are also provided side by side copies of text in English and their native language, as a way of promoting language acquisition. Graphic organizers and explicit vocabulary instruction are used in tandem to support the needs of this population 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELL students are involved in all aspects of our school community including extracurricular activities during the afterschool program such as basketball, football, volleyball (girls) coached by the bilingual Science teacher. ELL students also participate in the chess and technology clubs taught by the bilingual technology teacher. The school participates in pre-September orientations (grades K-8). Children's Arts and Science Workshops, Inc. (CASW) offers a summer program for our ELLs. The program ensures that each student is provided with both enrichment activities as well as academic ones. They work to bridge the gap between in-school curriculum and After school programming. We achieve this by offering special initiatives in addition to homework help. Each grade level is staffed with both a group leader and a youth worker, creating the optimal child to adult ratio so that they might serve youth most effectively. Students are also broken up into groups so that they may be best assisted in not only completing their homework but also comprehend what they've learned as retaining information is always the goal. They also create a theme of the month where the entire month is devoted to different topics and ends in a culminating event. This initiative was created in order to expand the paradigm of the students and expose them to a world they might not know about otherwise while teaching them the importance of collective work, public speaking, and encouraging a healthy curiosity of things and people outside of themselves.In addition, we have an after school program for middle school, East Side House, who have been part of PS/IS 18 since September 2015. The program believes that a student is well mentally, academically and physically can make a make a big difference in our future society. The program offers the students different activities which can run for a period of 3 to 6 months. Some of the activities are Culinary Arts, Arts and Craft, Homework help, Boys-Girls Club, Sports, Dance 1-2, Robotics 1-2 (STEM, which are a cutting edge technology program that can be adapted or tailor the student's needs, providing school age children with hands-on opportunities to explore their creativity while learning new skills in problem solving, engineering, and logical thinking), Skills Success (College Readiness, Universe, Film, Raspberry Pie, Young Engineers, Law Poetry, Debate, Math Club, Theater and Book Club. The program also hires licensed teachers from the school to provide mandated AIS in math, a licensed bilingual teacher who offers professional development to our staff, also helps them in planning. Students also go on educational trips to museums such as Natural History, Moving Images, Hall of Science, Bowling, Circle Line, Nature Walks, Sony Wonders, including spending the night over at the Intrepid Museum, etc. They also are part of outside agencies like SEA, DDC, and the Academy Columbia University. They also receive fruit bowl form City Harvest making sure that our students have different kind of fresh fruits in a weekly basis and not only 2018-19 CEP 62  that, but they will also educate parents in making healthy choices for their children.Our school staff offers after school programs such as volleyball for girls and basketball for boys, coached by the bilingual Science teacher. The purpose of the C.H.A.M.P.S. Middle School Sports and Fitness League at P.S. /I.S. 18 is to offer additional opportunities for students regardless of athletic ability, to engage in a variety of physical activities, and to encourage these students to find activities that they enjoy and can participate in for life. Our C.H.A.M.P.S. program has three seasons (fall, winter, and spring). We currently offer Girls’ Volleyball and Boys’ Basketball. Any elementary student (grades 4 and 5) or middle grades (6th, 7th, or 8th) student who is interested can participate in the C.H.A.M.P.S. after school programs. In addition, our middle school played in the Jr. NBA basketball tournament at Basketball City. Other after school activities may be added as student interest dictates. It is important for parents to know that after-school academic help is also available. Students will need parent guidance in selecting activities and clubs that give balance to a child’s day. A partial list follows: Chess Club, Band, Student Government, Technology Club, Yearbook, and Nutrition Committee.The website for PS 18 students is as follow: ps18.wiki spaces.com Our school believes in the equity of academic services for all members of our academic community, especially English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. All teachers differentiate their instruction to ensure that all of the constituents of their classroom can access grade appropriate materials. There are a myriad of instructional strategies that our teachers implement in the classroom to reach these students. All teachers use assessments to create groups that will help solidify understanding for all students. Students with special needs are grouped heterogeneously when they need peer motivation and interaction. If they need more individualized attention, our teachers create homogeneous groups while working on interventions that help these students assimilate academic materials. Some of these interventions include scaffold and tiered activities that give students a step by step template for implementing skills that lead to enduring understanding. Some of these tiered activities are implemented to help them gain comprehension including author’s purpose, symbolism, figurative language, and other elements of English Language Arts. Graphic organizers are often a salient feature of these interventions. When they are used consistently these repetitive strategies become solidified in the student’s repertoire of skills. In addition, the explicit teaching of vocabulary is essential for the academic milestones for both ELLs and SWDs. Once students become familiarized with the academic language relevant to the texts associated with the tasks, teachers ask students to engage in academic conversations that demonstrate a mastery of said terms. These services and resources are adapted for ELL-SWDs to correspond to their ages and grades by being appropriate their cognitive needs.The Special Education Teachers are participating in a program brought to the school by Educate The Whole Child, an initiative to support higher order thinking skills through Arts Integration. In 2016, the elementary class (Grades 3 – 5) participated in an ELA unit teaching writing, reading, listening, and speaking skills as students acted out the story “Rumplestilking” In 2017, the middle school self-contained class (Grades 6 – 8) participated in an interactive educational TV show using acting to teach the ELA standards. The 10-episode TV show will be seen on Manhattan cable TV in the fall.Also in June 2018 students performed the Broadway Show "Annie "to a big audience where all students with disabilities, ELL students and regular students participated. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer the Spanish Regents to our ELL students as a way of having them enter high school with an additional credit In addition, this past year we introduced Algebra I Regents, where 7 of our students took it and passed with 86 been the higher score and 76 been the lowest score. It was the first time and proved that our students are capable to do well. We are planning to add Living Environment Regents in Science for our eighth grade students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Does not apply we do not offer Dual Language 2018-19 CEP 63  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? New teachers will be trained in immersion techniques that will support them in planning and delivering comprehensible lessons that will engage all students. Some other topics include: Establishing clear expectations and protocols, Engagement with rubrics, reviewing data, Integrating technology, and differentiated instruction. The Department of Education offers professional development for educators of ELL'S as well for Special Education staff members, for example, Supporting ELL'S, Content-based Instructional Strategies for ELL'S, Teaching ELLs, Leadership Institute in Upper Elementary Mathematics for Teachers of ELLs,Also the staff have been trained in Reading Rescue , Foundations , ST Math and STEM. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor who helps all our students transition from middle school to high school invites teachers and students to visit colleges so our students start looking and planning for the future, where the goal is to attend college.All our staff attend workshops, as it pertains to instructional and the social-emotional needs of our students and our families. We take into consideration the strength and needs of our staff and design a professional learning plan that will best serve our learning community. Some of the topics for professional development workshops include: best practices and clear expectations, collaborative planning via established protocols, engagement with rubrics, the review of regulations and expectations, and infusing technology into the content areas. At the culmination of every workshop, agendas, sign-in sheets, and materials will be filed. In addition, our staff members that attend off-site training will return to the school to turnkey to the staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During parental involvement hours on Tuesdays from 2:30 - 3:15 p.m., teachers set up appointments and meet with parents to discuss language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The bilingual guidance counselor or licensed bilingual pedagogues provide interpretation and translation as needed. We ensure that the parent of every ELL student is met with individually during the school year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We send appointment letters and keep logs of all ELL parental communication. Teachers also send emails and communicate about student progress through the Teacher ease.com grade book program. We hold monthly parent meetings conducted in the parents' preferred language. We offer cooking, step and yoga classes to parents, monthly Breakfasts with the Principal, Parent Pajama Day, we celebrate literacy with parents in scheduled events in grades K-3 and on Bear Day for grades K-8. We invite parents to accompany classes on field trips, for example to Philadelphia this year. Parents attended Repertorio Español and a Circle Line Cruise. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Connie Mejia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS18 School DBN: 06M018 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Connie Mejia Title Principal Donna Mc Guire Assistant Principal Alina Reyes Parent Coordinator Jazmin Fernandez Alamo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alma Ramirez Parent Melissa Rogiers SPED Teacher/Subject Area Kathy Rubendall Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A Candida Cabrera LEONEL Almonte Victor Velez N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Bil Coordinator Other Technology TCHR Other BIL.TCHR Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/20/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 N/A N/A 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 N/A 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M018 School Name: Park Terrace Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Candida Cabrera Bilingual Coordinator Yes Jazmin Fernandez Alamo English as a New Language Teacher Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents enrolling their children in our school must complete the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) form. This provides the school of the child's a home language. In addition, the home language is also noted on the Elementary School Cumulative Record Card, the parents must inform the school of the languages spoken at home. Based on this information the school maintains an appropriate record of the primary language of each parent. This information is also entered in the ATS and on the student emergency card. Parents are also given the Federal Parent/Guardian Student Ethnic and Race Identification form to identify their ethnic background. The following 4 steps and placement into the ELL program chosen by the parent must be completed within 10 school days (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Step 1: Administer the Home Language Identification Survey,Step 2: 2018-19 CEP 68  Determination of NYSITELL Eligibility, Step 3: Administration of the NYSITELL, Step 4: Administering the Spanish LAB 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Our parents' preferred language is Spanish. Grades K - 8 including Special Education Classes parents they do speak Spanish .We have one parent in fourth grade monolingual class who speaks Urdu but she also speaks English; and if by any chance something is said that she doesn't understand she asks me to tell her in a simple way so she will understand. 242 Spanish -241 71.3 96 English - 97 28.7 71.6 28.4 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 69  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Sept. to June Every month letters will be sent to parents either for principal bulletin information, teachers' letters either school materials, trips, information regarding homework where parents should be aware of a specific assignment or any other classroom matter. Any specific event such as picture day, school events, parents wellness program where they are invited to participate in a yoga, zumba classes, workshops; information about any after school or Saturday program, parent handbook that goes home also, school calendar, etc. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As I always receive any information that goes to parents I do write the letters back to back in English and Spanish. This way parents will be able to read the letter the language they preferred. If we are in a meeting I do translation side by side. During Parent Teacher Conferences we pair, as per grade, the bilingual and monolingual teachers to help each other with the translation so parents will be able to receive All documents, central and regional communications are translated into Spanish. In addition, translation services will be provided during group meetings, one-to-one meetings, workshops on an as-needed basis. Written documents such as but not limited to letters, principal bulletin letters to parents, legal or disciplinary matters, permission slips/consent forms, ELL Entitlement letters, Non-Entitlement letters, Continued services, report cards, the 4 parent-teacher conference meetings/any other parent meeting, safety and health information, school calendar, registrations, applications, entitlement to public education or placement in any special education, after school programs and any other student documents, will be translated in order to communicate with parents.If the parent does not speak the languages provided by the school, we call to the translation unit 718-752-7373 or email translations@schools.nyc.gov in order to help the parents. We also post at the entrance of the building next to the security agent a multilingual welcome poster that can assist them with their native language. 2018-19 CEP 70  the services they need. In the case of Special Ed. teachers, either the ENL, Bilingual Coordinator, the Technology teachers they will sit with them to translate to those parents who are in need of the translation services. During the monthly parent meetings, the Bilingual Coordinator or the ENL teacher will always be available to attend the meetings as there are always parents who only speak only language (either Span. or English) and she is able to translate whatever issues has been discussed. 2018-19 CEP 71  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school During parent orientation, the parents watch a mandated video prior to enrolling their children in school. The video must be in the parent preferred language. At the beginning of the school year, we invite parents to come to a parent orientation and during the four parent teacher conferences during the school year. In May, parents whose children are at risk of failing will be request to attend an individual meeting with th child's teacher and the principal. In addition, we have parents workshops throughout the year. In case a parent is called by the guidance counselor, to discuss any matter concerning her child such as a disciplinary matter, HS placement, the child placement in any special education, children living in shelters, any child needs,etc. The attendance teacher, who is fully bilingual, will call parents in case a child is absent to verify the illness or any other reason that child is not attending school on a regular basis, children lateness, the attendance teacher also visits students' home whenever is needed. September through June (Whole school year ) plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During parent teacher conferences (PTC) we pair middle school and elementary teachers by grade and that they are teaching the same students on a daily basis to speak to parents. Usually when a monolingual teaches the same students as a bilingual teacher, this can translate to the parent who doesn't understand English. Basically, grades 4, 5,6, 7 and 8 teachers are fully bilingual, except the 8 th grade teachers who are monolingual , and the technology teacher who 2018-19 CEP 72  is fully bilingual translates for them, but they still work together during PTC . Teachers who are monolingual either the ENL teacher, who is bilingual, or the Bilingual Coordinator will assist them translating. The elementary classes teachers are fully bilingual, except for the K Special Education teacher and the Special Ed. class teacher for grades 3, 4, and 5 who are monolingual and the literacy coach who is bilingual translates for the K class and either the ENL of Bilingual Coordinator will translate. The 2nd, 3rd grades teacher who are monolingual their parents speak English. During parent workshops or 2018-19 CEP 73  monthly parent meetings, either the bilingual coordinator and the ENL teachers are always available for parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school always invite our parents to attend to different workshops throughout the year. During this school year we are planning to offer services to parents on Saturday such as GED classes, ESL classes, counseling if the parents are willing to attend. Last school year the guidance counselor gave parents workshops on Saturday about different topic pertaining about the safety and health, mainly on teenagers and their safety. If by any chance we have an emergency, as the principal has planned with all the staff, we must carry our rocl copy and emergency telephone numbers with us so we can get in contact with parents, Also, parents have always been notified during their monthly parent meetings, in addition, in writing as the principal has send them letters, the parent handbook ,etc. that they must call 311 to find out where their children are and how to go there. In addition, teachers keep in their cell phones their parents cell/ home phone numbers. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As per Chancellor's Regulation A-663 we need to translate documents containing critical information regarding our student' education, we also make sure our parents know their rights and that they can request translation if they need it. Our parents are informed of their Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities during their Parent Association monthly meeting; principal meetings with our parents where she sends them the monthly "Parent Bulletin - A Message from the Principal" where she has breakfast for them and talk about the important issues that have been discussed, school budget, activities where parents have been invited to participate with/ without their children, (for example: workout Wednesday- where parents and children meet in the gym for a 30 min. of fun and fitness for the body and soul), a yoga class; etc.; parent volunteers; Annual Title I Parent Meeting before Oct. 31st; to be a member of the SLT; parent workshops where different topics have been discussed; etc. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 74   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school sends a written letter to parents notifying them on their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their appropriate covered languages, and provides instructions on how to obtain needed services. The school posts at the entrance of the school a sign of the covered languages indicating the office/room where a copy of such written notification can be obtained (the parent's bulletin board and at the school entrance). The school safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers in accordance to the Chancellor's Regulation-A663 Translations. Parents can also go to the school website to be informed about the Chancellor's Regulations A-633 Translations. Parents are informed to their rights to request translation either by a staff member in school or through the free services over the phone by Translation and Interpretation Unit which offers over 200 languages and can be obtained directly from our school. Parents are always invited to our meetings, activities, PTA meeting, Saturday activities, workshops, meetings, etc. In addition, our Parent Coordinator will call parents to invite them to activities or meetings with the principal, even though flyers/calendar/letters go home and are posted throughout the school for them to read in Spanish and English.At the beginning of each month a school calendar goes home in Spanish and English for parents to post it on the refrigerator as it tells them of all the school activities, meeting or events going on in school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback from parents through surveys where parents express their feelings and needs. In addition, during the monthly Principal Breakfast parent workshop, parents have the opportunity to give suggestions of what they will like to see happening in school. The principal, the parent coordinator, staff members and parents during the SLT meeting discuss matters that concerns everybody and the suggestions given by parents. During the SLT members discuss the survey that will be sent to parents informing us about the workshops they will like to receive during the year. For this school year 2018-19, we are planning to offer ESL classes , GED classes on Saturday for parents who want them,, In addition, parents were asked what other services they would like to receive during this school year. 2018-19 CEP 75 
