2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M028 School Name: P.S. 028 WRIGHT BROTHERS Principal: AWILDA BAEZ 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 28/The Wright Brothers School 06M028 310600010028 Pre K – 5 th School Number (DBN): 475 W. 155 th Street New York, New York 10032 212-690-3014 212-368-5978 Phone Number: Fax: Teresa Montano tmontano@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mrs. Awilda Baez Simone Rosa Jasmine Dones Simone Rosa TBD N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360-78 Broadway, Manhattan, NY 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRamire@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, Manhattan, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 718-923-5146 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Awilda Baez/Principal Simon Rosa/UFT Chapter Leader Jasmine Dones/PTA President N/A N/A N/A N/A Shirley J. Whaley WaleskaFigueroa ElsaMorocho *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) RemediosRamirez LeonorGarcia ElkisFelice JessicaMurawski CarlosAlvarez MiriamSuarez ArelisVillalba Aaron Sidlo Francis Acosta Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 28’s diverse population is what fuels our vision to create an environment where all children can learn. The ultimate goal of the P.S. 28 staff is to provide students with a well-rounded educational experience. We utilize the common core aligned curricula (e.g. Go Math and ReadyGen) to support our endeavors as well as targeted conversations, held during professional development sessions on Mondays. These conversations result in adjustments to the curriculum, the implementation of programs that expand learning opportunities through tutorials conducted 2018-19 CEP 9  during and after school hours as well as the development of formative assessments that are utilized on an ongoing basis to evaluate student progress. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. To ensure that students receive a diverse experience, we have developed partnerships with several community based organizations that include the following: ACDP, the Guggenheim Museum, Cornell University Nutrition Program, New Victory Theater, CookShop, Lutheran Family Health Center’s School-Based Dental Program, CHALK (Choosing Healthy Active Lifestyles for Kids), Enact, and Arts Horizon. Parents are also an integral part of the school community and are invited to participate in activities affiliated with the aforementioned organizations as well as in workshops centered around strategies that they can utilize at home to support their children academically and socially. In addition, parents work alongside teachers and administrators through The School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association whereby parents are instrumental in spearheading activities that support with the implementation of school wide initiatives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Public School 28 is located in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan. This Pre K-5 th grade school serves an ethnically diverse population consisting of approximately 700 students. The community is home to many new immigrants from the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Central and South America, Africa, Haiti, and the Middle East. Our student body is composed of 85% Hispanics, 12% African Americans and 3% white. Of our student population 40% are emergent bilingual students and 17% are students with special needs. Our student population presents challenges, due to the high number of students learning English as a New language. To this end, we provide students with multiple entry points into academic and social life at P.S. 28. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The students in our school community are from all walks of life. They have unique strengths and challenges, that include, learning English as a new language. To ensure that all students have the potential to successfully meet or exceed grade level standards as well as their individual goals, they are afforded multiple entry points into academic and social life at P.S. 28 . Resources were leveraged to customize learning for students. As a result, students successfully engaged in project based learning whereby they explored and deepened their knowledge in reference to real-world problems and through discussions and hands on activities discovered solutions. For example, research on healthy eating habits led to the implementation of a hydroponics lab where students grew vegetables and learned how to use them to cook healthy meals. In addition, partnerships with several community based organizations that include the Guggenheim Museum, Cornell University Nutrition Program, New Victory Theater, CookShop, Lutheran Family Health Center’s School-Based Dental Program, CHALK (Choosing Healthy Active Lifestyles for Kids), Society of the Arts and ACDP increased services and resources for students and parents. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will enhance each student's social and academic experiences by embedding additional practices into classroom learning. Teachers will work collaboratively to develop rigorous learning activities to stimulate students to think critically as they problem solve and share ideas. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M028 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 81 81 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.3% % Reduced Lunch 36.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 79.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 74 74 92.9% 0.3% 25.8% 14.0% 0.9% 1.0% 6 0% 5.9 36.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the data on the 2018 ELA State Exam there was a 10.8% increase in the number of students scoring on level 1. It is our goal to change that percentage by moving at least half (6%) of those students up and out of the level 1 range. To address this issue, PS 28 will partner with ACDP, a Community School Organization to support our students to improve their skills in English Language Arts through extended learning time. Students in need of extra support will also attend our school's Saturday Academy and Title III After School Program. In addition, students will use the Raz-Kids Program both in school and at home to reinforce the ELA skills.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-5 will show progress on the ELA State Exam with a 6% decrease in students scoring on level 1 when compared to the 2018 State ELA Results. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENL teachers will support the integrated portion of ELA through small and whole group instruction to provide additional support in strategy skills. Also, ENL students will use diverse scaffolds (i.e. charts, pictures, books on tape, peer support, Radz-Kids, etc.) to support students to master their understanding of literacy concepts and improve their fluency. Special Education teachers during common planning, will discuss and implement how to execute strategies to support students' IEP goals. All teachers will partner with ACDP, a Community School Organization (after school program) to provide additional support to reinforce ELA concepts presented in class through guided small group instruction. This will enhance students' conceptual understanding of reading and writing. 3rd – 5 th grade students 3rd – 5 th grade students 3rd – 5 th grade students 9/18 – 6/19 All Teachers/ Administrators 9/18 – 6/19 All Teachers/ Administrators 9/18 – 6/19 All Teachers/ Administrators Parent workshops will be held on strategies parents can utilize at home to support their children. Parents 10/18 – 6/19 All Teachers/Parent Coordinator/ Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to be active partners in their child's educational experience. Beginning in September of 2018, opportunities will be made available to parents to visit their child's classroom a minimum of three times a year, attend parent workshops throughout the year that will focus on strategies that they can utilize at home to support their children in literacy and mathematics, attend ENL classes and participate in additional parental involvement activities. Classroom teachers, administrators, the parent coordinator and the Bilingual Specialist will spearhead and monitor the activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 13  The following will support us in accomplishing this goal: Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February of 2019 a mid-point check will be conducted to review students' progress towards meeting the goal as measured by their performance on ELA unit test and projects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Students' progress will be assessed through frequent formal (i.e. unit test, performance tasks, etc.) and formative assessments (i.e. class work, performance task, etc.) in ELA. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The preliminary results of the 2018-2019 Learning Survey indicates that 95% of the school community feels that adults at P.S. 28 build strong systems and structures to help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. To ensure that students continue to be supported and challenged to advance academically and socially, additional supports (i.e. buddy system in the classroom, adopt a student program, etc.) will be implemented in the upcoming school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will be invited to participate in school-wide activities that will help them to enhance their social and emotional skills. This will be evidenced by agendas of assembly programs and school events. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Adopt a student program Pre K-5 9/18 – 6/19 Administration, support staff, teachers Respect for All Assembly Programs Pre K-5 9/18 – 6/19 Administration and teachers School Spirit Activities Pre K-5 9/18 – 6/19 Administration and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school 2018-2019 school year parents will be maintained abreast of all school events via P.T.A meetings, School Calendar, Class DOJO, etc. In addition, they will receive invitations to participate in all school activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All faculty members will be part of the Adopt a Student Program as well as all events. Activities will be held during the school day as well as after school to ensure that all community members have the opportunity to participate. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 a brief survey will be created and implemented to gauge how students and teachers view the effectiveness of the school-wide activities. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A school created survey focused on the effectiveness of the activities and partnerships formed will be completed by members of the school community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Promoting critical thinking in students is an ongoing goal at P.S. 28. One method of achieving this goal is through the use of higher order questioning and discussion techniques. According to the data on the 2018-2019 School Survey, 76% of teachers stated that students respond to challenging questions in class. As a result of this data, we must target this area of instruction if we are to increase the rigor of teacher practices and student achievement. By June of 2019, 100% of teachers will ask questions that require students to use higher order critical thinking skills in order to respond to challenging questions . This will be monitored and measured through teacher observations conducted by the administration, including a mid-year checkpoint in February using the Advance System to track progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In June of 2019, 75% of the teachers will be rated effective/highly effective in the area of questioning and discussion techniques (3b) as evidenced by the data on the Advance System. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  A minimum of 8 professional development sessions, spearheaded by teachers and administrators, will focus on questioning and discussion techniques. All teachers 9/ 2018 – 6/ 2019 Professional development activities will include analyzing teacher and student roles during questioning and discussion techniques, as well as examining critical attributes and examples of questioning techniques in highly effective classrooms. Through professional development, peer support and conversations with administrators, teachers will exchange ideas on incorporating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques in ELA, Go Math, Science, Social Studies, Music, Technology, Physical Education and Visual Arts. All teachers 9/ 2018 – 6/ 2019 All Teachers 9/ 2018 – 6/ 2019 A normed rubric for questioning and discussion techniques will be utilized. All Teachers 9/ 2018– 6/ 2019 Partnering of teachers for peer visitations will support teachers to reach highly effective questioning and discussion techniques. All Teachers 9/ 2018 – 6/ 2019 Administrators/Teachers demonstrating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques Administrators/Teachers demonstrating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques Administrators/Teachers demonstrating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques Administrators/Teachers demonstrating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques Administrators/Teachers demonstrating highly effective questioning and discussion techniques 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to workshops to learn of strategies that they can utilize at home to support their child. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will meet during the Monday professional development sessions held from 2:20 pm to 3:40 pm, during teacher team meetings and on a one to one basis. These sessions will be led by administrators and by teachers rated highly effective in the area of questioning and discussion techniques. Resources will include rubrics, peer inter visitations, working with curriculum text, and through teacher led discussions (during grade level meetings and professional development sessions) on how to enhance practice on developing higher order thinking skills questions that lead to challenging student led discussions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 75% of the teachers will be rated (or moving towards being rated) effective/highly effective in questioning and discussion techniques. The Danielson Framework will be utilized to assess the quality of teacher’s questions and student discussions. Teacher’s progress will be tracked every two months utilizing the data on the MOTP Summary Reports and Observation Dashboard on Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The data on the MOTP on the Advance System will be utilized to assess each teacher's progress as well as how they have addressed feedback provided in observation reports in the area of questioning and discussions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per teacher responses on the 2018 NYC Learning Survey over 95% of the teachers stated that the school's leadership has a strong ability to develop a climate of inclusiveness, inspire staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement, and seek input from all members of the school community. To continue to build upon this positive vision, multiple opportunities for teachers to grow professionally, provide feedback on school policies and serve as leaders will be afforded through teacher teams, SLT, Professional Learning Committee, etc. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will serve as a member on one or more school based teams as evidenced by the Team Organization Sheet agendas and sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 9/ 2018 - Administration 6/ 2019 Teachers Content Specialists Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Beginning in September of 2018, teachers will be invited to join a team and/or school committee where they will be responsible for providing input about content, school policies and other pertinent issues that will improve learning outcomes for all students (i.e. ENLs, SWD, SIFE, etc.). Strategies imbedded in instruction will include: collaborative group activities, presentation of ideas through Art, use of books on tape for at-risk and accelerated learners, etc. Additional support will be provided through extended learning time. Students in need of extra support will also attend our school's Saturday Academy and Title III After School Program. In addition, students will use the Raz-Kids and ST-Math Programs both in school and at home to reinforce their ELA skills and accelerate their learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning on October 2018 parents will receive information on events that they can attend in the school and on the diverse ways they can serve as members on the diverse school committee's (i.e. SLT, P.T.A. etc.) . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will meet with their teams on a weekly basis to engage in conversations in reference to school policies, curriculum and other pertinent issues. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP Title I TA 21st Century Grant X SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February of 2019, 100% of the teachers will be a member on one or more of the school's teams as evidenced by the teams' sign in sheets. In addition, to assess the effectiveness of each team, a survey aligned to the NYC Learning Survey will be distributed to all teachers and results will be analyzed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback from teachers on a survey aligned to NYC Learning Survey will be ananlyzed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2018 NYC Learning Survey's section of Strong Family and Community Ties, 69% of the parents responded that they have had opportunities to be involved in school activities. PS 28 is an advocate for parental involvement and has created multiple opportunities for parents to volunteer by inviting them to the Learning Leaders Program, SLT, field trips and Parent Association meetings. To ensure that parents have an abundance of activities to select from to participate in, in the 2018-2019 school year additional opportunities will be offered to parents (e.g. Book Fairs, Reading Buddies, Cookshop in the Classrooms,etc.). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the parents will be invited to participate in a minimum of 8 activities in the school as measured by the Monthly Parent Calendar of events, agendas and attendance forms. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Beginning in September of 2018 all parents will receive a survey where they can highlight their areas of interest in terms of workshops and how they can engage in volunteer service in the school. In October of 2018 the Parent Teacher Association will discuss diverse opportunities for parents to volunteer in classroom activities and/or school events. By February of 2019 all parents will be invited to volunteer and/or participate in classroom or school-wide events. Parental participation will focus on ways they can enhance their children's skills. This will include learning strategies in reading (i.e. read aloud, picture walk, asking probing questions, etc.), mathematics (i.e. making trips to stores and asking their child to figure out the cost of the purchase, etc.) and in resolving conflict (i.e. listening to peers and identifying a solution amicably, etc.). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents 9/18-6/19 Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator Parent Association Student Council Parents 9/18-6/19 Parent Association Parents 9/18-6/19 Administrators Student Council Teachers Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association Student Council If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ACDP/Guggenheim Museum Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Parent Coordinator, Parent Teacher Association and the Student Council will work jointly to plan meetings with parents as well as to develop surveys and letters that will be distributed to parents. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February of 2019 the parents will have been invited to a minimum of 4 activities in the school as evidenced by the Parent Monthly Activity Calendar and meeting sign in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback from parents through surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grade 1 st -5 th that are not meeting the reading benchmarks for their grade. Students in grade 1 st -5 th that are not meeting the math benchmarks for their grade. Students in grade 1 st -5 th that are not meeting the science benchmarks for their grade. Students in grade 1 st -5 th that are not meeting the social studies benchmarks for their grade. Students in grades K-5 demonstrating difficulties socially and emotionally. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Strategy lessons, Guided and Independent Reading Whole and small group instruction, Peer Support During and After School Hours Whole and small group instruction, one to one conferences, Peer Support Whole and small group instruction, one to one conferences, Peer Support Whole and small group instruction, one to one conferences, Peer Support Small group sessions, one to one conferences Differentiated hands on activities Title III Program integrating literacy through the content of science Title III Program integrating literacy through the content of social studies Discussions on coping skills and conflict resolution to promote personal, social and academic growth During and After School Hours During and After School Hours During and After School Hours During School Hours 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 230 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Weekly counseling sessions for students as well as the distribution of school supplies and uniforms. Referrals for students for dental care will be provided by the Dental Clinic housed in the school. Also, upon parents' request, information will be provided for counseling, health care, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 28  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 29  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teacher turn-over is very low at our school. However, on several occasions teachers have relocated or chosen to work at a school closer to home. To ensure that we are fully staffed, teachers are selected through the Open Market for interviews. In addition, all staff members complete a survey that is utilized by the administrators to customize weekly professional development sessions. Also, teachers in need of completing credits towards certification attend a higher educational institution to complete courses that will place them on the path of being a HQT. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All faculty members, paraprofessionals and administrators attend high quality professional development off site (e.g. District and City level sponsored workshops) offered by specialists in literacy, math , ENL and Social Studies to ensure that we are trained in the latest innovative practices. In addition, when planning professional development sessions at the school level, diverse data (e.g. NYS ELA and Math test results, MOTP scores, School Quality Report, Framework for Great Schools, teacher interests, etc.) are consulted. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The curriculum and activities for preschool students are aligned to the CCLS offering students the opportunity to learn skills that will support the transition to kindergarten. Pre-kindergarten teachers participate in vertical planning with kindergarten teachers to ensure essential skills are taught. In addition, several times throughout the year, parents of preschool children from neighboring daycares are invited to bring their child to our school to visit the kindergarten classroom. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers and paraprofessionals are afforded multiple opportunities to voice their decision in terms of the selection of assessments and topics for professional development. They each participate in grade level meetings on Mondays and during the week. During these meetings they have the opportunity to align curriculum based assessments to specific activities. The results of each assessment are utilized for grouping and differentiating instruction for the diverse learners in each classroom. The assessment results are analyzed and used to discuss assessment selections and 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 433,902 X 2018-19 CEP 31 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 10, 14, 18  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 64893 32,846 0 4,383,501 X X 15, 17, 19 10 10, 14, 18 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 32  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy PS 28, in conjunction with the Parent Teacher Association and the School Leadership Team, will work to ensure that all parents have multiple opportunities to be involved in school events. Through parent meetings and parent bulletins, parents will continue to be informed regularly about all school matters. Workshops will continue to be presented on strategies and activities directly related to the school’s programs, curriculum and initiatives. In addition, workshops will be tailored to parents’ needs and interests. The Parent Education Program will continue to provide classes and workshops that will equip parents with skills and strategies that will enhance their lives. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate and support all parental involvement activities at P.S. 28. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of the parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of students learning English as a New Language and students with disabilities. Our school conducts an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms are used to design workshops and support systems that more effectively meet the needs of parents and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained in the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 CEP 34  In carrying out the Title I parental involvement requirements, to the extent feasible, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of all Title I parents, providing: ● Information and reports to parents in English and Spanish, ● Monthly Parent Association Meetings in English and Spanish ● Monthly Bilingual Parent Bulletins ● Bi-Weekly Executive Board Meetings ● Workshops through the Learning Leader Parent Volunteer Program ● Assigning parents (that have completed the Learning Leaders Program) support positions within the school ● Scheduling parent workshops and providing materials to support parents to work with their children. As a result parents are active participants in supporting their children to achieve higher levels in literacy, math and other content areas ● Computer classes in English and Spanish (as requested by parents) ● Weekly ENL classes (as requested by parents) ● A Monthly Information Bulletin Board displayed in front of the main office with that contains information in reference to school and community events as well as resources ● A weekly lending library in the Parent Coordinator’s office with an array of books and parent resources, ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress (i.e. information on how to utilize School CNXT, School website, DOE website) ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; P.S. 28 will coordinate and integrate parental involvement strategies in Title I with parental involvement strategies under the following other programs: ● Pre-K Program ● Learning Leaders ● Small Groups Discussion ● Early Reading Program in the Library on Tuesdays from 3:00pm – 4:00pm for students that have a sibling that is not eligible because of his age to attend school 2018-19 CEP 35  In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. P.S. 28 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement by: ● Discussing student academic achievement (formal and informal assessment data) during Parent Association meetings ● Providing workshops to discuss strategies to increase student academic achievement in reading, math, science and social studies To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality: Parental Involvement and School Quality P.S. 28 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan by: ● Advertising meeting dates and agenda of the District Committee responsible for the DCEP ● Discussing the content of the DCEP Plan with parents in Spanish and English at the Parent Association meetings, School Leadership Team meetings and parent workshops Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: holding an annual Title I Parent Conference; hosting educational family events and activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events; establishing a Parent Resource Center for parents to utilize materials from the lending library and/or utilize the computers set aside for them. ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; P.S. 28 will take the following actions to assess increased and improved parental involvement at the school: ● Monitor the quantity and quality of parental involvement (including guest lists, workshop attendance sheets, attendance at Parent Association meetings and surveys) ● The Parent Coordinator will maintain a log of parental issues and concerns ● The Parent Coordinator will contact parents with information about medical and insurance companies to ensure that students within the school have proper medical services. P.S. 28 will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities that provide parents with additional opportunities to participate in the education of their children by: ● Providing workshops for early development of literacy ● Providing a family literacy program ● Providing workshops on Health and Nutrition 2018-19 CEP 36  ● Offering ongoing parent workshops on parenting skills through Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center and other community based organizations ● Offering support to parents seeking employment School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 28M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments.. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Convening an annual meeting for Title I parents to inform them of the Title I Program and their right to be involved ● Offering a flexible number of meetings at various times, and if necessary, providing funds to secure transportation, child care or home visits for those parents who cannot attend regular school meetings ● Actively involving parents in planning, receiving and improving the Title I programs and the parental involvement policy ● Providing parents with timely information about all programs ● Providing performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual and school district education information ● Providing high quality curriculum and instruction School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships P.S. 28 will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of Title I participating children in an understandable and uniformed format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand as follows: ● Parent newsletter in Spanish and English and any other language needed ● Monthly Bilingual Parent Bulletin ( Large Calendar displayed in front of main office) ● Parent workshops ● Monthly Information Bulletin Board display 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Public display of School Leadership Team agenda and minutes ● Parent Calendar ● Community Education Council Monthly Meeting (CEC) announcements meetings ● Providing opportunities for parents to work with the Parent Coordinator to receive assistance on how to understand the accountability system, (e.g., ESSA/State accountability System, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report, etc.). ● Scheduling parent meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational programs and to afford parents the opportunity to provide suggestions; ● Translating all critical school documents and providing interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Maintaining ongoing communication between teachers and parents through: - Parent/Teacher conferences and during on Tuesdays from 2:20 pm – 3:35 pm - Frequent reports to parents in reference to their child’s progress - Reasonable access to staff - Opportunities to volunteer and participate in the school - School updates and upcoming events on school website - Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards: - Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; - Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; on Tuesdays from 3:00pm to 4:05pm Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments ● supporting parents on how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled at the convenience of the parents); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: ● Participating in professional development activities if the school determines that it is appropriate (i.e. literacy classes, workshops on reading, strategies to become involved in developing, implementing, evaluating, and revising the school-parent involvement policy) ● Participating in or requesting technical assistance training that the local education authority or school offers on child rearing practices and teaching and learning strategies ● Talking with my child about his/her school activities everyday ● Working with my child on school work;  reading with my kindergarten through 1 st grade child for 15 – 30 minutes per day  assure that my 2 nd through 3 rd grade child read to me for 20 – 30 minutes per day  assure that my 4 th through 5 th grade child reads for at least 25 – 35 minutes per day ● Monitoring my child’s/children’s: 2018-19 CEP 39   Attendance at school: ensuring my child arrives to school on time as well as following the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Homework: checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Television watching  Sleep patterns and behavior: ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child appropriate to his/her age; ● Sharing the responsibility for improving my child’s/children’s achievement ● Communicating with my child’s/children’s teacher(s) and school about their educational needs ● Providing information to the school on the type of training or assistance I would like to help me become a more effective partner in my child’s/children’s educational progress ● Supporting the school’s discipline policy III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● wear school uniform; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete homework and submit all assignments on time; ● reading 25 books or more a year; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 40  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction by offering extended learning time for students, customizing instruction to match the needs of students (i.e. English as a New Language students, students with disabilities, high performing students, at-risk students, etc.) and combining resources (i.e. staff gymnasium, equipment, educational materials, etc.). The program will provide workshops to parents that will support them to assist their children at home. Since this is the first year of the program’s implementation, data is not available to outline the impact CS strategies have had on student academic outcomes. However, in October 2018 all participating students will be administered an ELA and Math assessment to measure their skills in each content area. Interim assessments will monitor student growth and support will be provided to students demonstrating difficulty in progressing. In June of 2019 a final assessment will be administered to the participating students in ELA and Math to measure student growth, proficiency and the impact that CS strategies have had on student academic outcomes. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Goal #1 By February 2019, targeted students will increase their attendance rate by 3% when compared to their June 2018 attendance record. Action Plan: The 2017-2018 attendance record for all students will be analyzed. The students with an attendance record of chronic absences (90% percent or lower) will be part of an attendance improvement program. The CS Director will work collaboratively with school personnel to develop a rapport with both the students and parents. He will have meetings and visits with the families to learn of their concerns and provide assistance to address them accordingly. Goal #2 By June 2019 a minimum of 250 students will participate in an after school enrichment program. An after-school program, containing two cycles (i.e. October 2018 - January 2019 & February 2019 - June 2019) for students on grades K-5 will be in place by October 2018. Participating students will receive extended learning time from 2:10 pm - 6:00 pm in reading, mathematics and physical education (i.e. sports, dance, etc.). By June 2019, students will demonstrate an improvement in academic performance and participation due to the the extra time spent with teachers, staff and each other in a positive social and emotional learning atmosphere. 2018-19 CEP 41  Goal # 3 By June 2019, a minimum of 8 workshops will be offered to parents. Action Plan: In October of 2018 a survey will be distributed to parents to afford them the opportunity to identify workshops that will be of interest to them. The results will be analyzed and utilized to create a schedule of workshops. The CSD, will work collaboratively with the ENACT program manager to provide the parents with a calendar of workshops from October 2018 - June 2019. Goal # 4 By June 2019, parents and students will have the opportunity to learn about healthy eating and wellness by participating in a minimum of 4 workshops sponsored by Cornell University.. Action Plan: From October of 2018 through May 2019, the CSD will work jointly with school personnel and Cornell University to host CookShop workshops for parents and students. The workshops will provide insight on how participants can make healthy food choices, cook healthy meals and develop a personalized workout regimen. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The mantra for the Community School program is to ensure that every child is successful by demonstrating ROAR (Respect, On Task, Achieve, Responsible) qualities. By achieving the goals of improving attendance, providing an after school program for 250 students and offering interactive and wellness programs for parents and students, the CS will have a complete support system that will result in improved academic performance for students. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 2018-19 CEP 42  Expanded Learning Time A Minimum of 250 , K - 5 students Family Engagement A Minimum of 250 , K - 5 students Health and Wellness A Minimum of 250, K-5 Students Goal: # 2 - By June 2019 a minimum of 250 students will participate in an after school enrichment program. Goal: #3 - By June 2019, a minimum of 8 workshops will be offered to parents. Goal: #4 - By June 2019, parents and students will have the opportunity to learn about healthy eating and wellness by participating in a minimum of 4 healthy eating workshops sponsored by Cornell University. An afterschool program, containing two cycles (i.e. October 2018 - January 2019 & February 2019 - June 2019) for students on grades K-5 will be in place by October 2018. By June 2019, students will demonstrate an improvement in academic performance and participation due to the the extra time spent with teachers, staff and each other while creating a positive social and emotional learning atmosphere. From October of 2018 through May 2019, the CSD will work jointly with school personnel to host CookShop workshops for parents and students. From October of 2018 through May 2019, the CSD will work jointly with school personnel and the CHALK program to host CookShop workshops for parents and students. The workshops will provide insight on how participants can make healthy food choices, cook healthy meals and develop a 2018-19 CEP 43  Attendance Supports A Minimum of 250, K-5 Students personalized workout regimen. By February 2019 & June 2019, program participants will increase their attendance as a result of school to home connections, additional academic and social support provided and extended learning time opportunities. Goal: # 1 - By February 2019, students will increase their attendance by 3% when compared to their June 2019 attendance record. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The partnership with ACDP will allow the Community School to provide students with extended learning time. Students will receive additional instruction and support in the areas of reading, mathematics and health. To ensure that students have multiple entry points activities will be tiered to support students that are learning English as a New Language as well as students with disabilities. Adjustments to the school schedule will be made to accommodate a Monday - Friday program from 2:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m (supervised by the CSD) and a Saturday program from 9:00 a.m - 12:00 p.m. (supervised by assistant principals). The Monday - Friday program’s ratio of staff to students will conform with the DYCD protocols of 10:1. Professional development for the ACDP staff will include the following topics: Staff protocols, communicating with children, how to handle emergencies, classroom management, lesson planning, curriculum development, teaching techniques and parent engagement. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 2018-19 CEP 44  3. 4. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The CSD will work with administrators and additional staff members to develop surveys for parents, programs that enhance students’ social and emotional growth (i.e. ELT in literacy and mathematics, dance and sports, ST Math & Radz Kids Programs, etc.). It also includes health and wellness activities (i.e. Cornell University, etc.). School personnel will support the CSD in implementing and monitoring the progress of each program as well as its impact on student learning and parental involvement. 2. Students’ diverse and personal needs are assessed daily through teacher observations, parental feedback, students’ performance and student discussions. Each issue is addressed in a timely fashion and customized (i.e. extended learning time focused on literacy for students at risk of not meeting grade level reading standards) to meet the needs of specific students. Parents also receive timely and customized support based on identified needs. For example, the guidance counselors and Parent Coordinator provide parents with referrals to agencies that can assist them in their areas of need (i.e. mental health services, health insurance, etc.). In order to ensure that services are seamless and timely, the CSD will work with school personnel during and after school hours to identify the needs of parents and students via data collected, surveys and meetings that will morph into a schedule of workshops and/or referrals to outside providers that will assist the targeted audience in their area of need. 3. The CSD, SLT, PTA as well as school personnel will work collaboratively to ensure that all parents have multiple opportunities to voice their opinions, concerns and/or needs. This will be made possible through monthly PTA and SLT meetings, family night and other events. In addition, after each workshop, surveys will be distributed to and provide parents with the opportunity to provide feedback on the effectiveness of the program and what things can be done to increase its effectiveness over time. The CSD will continuously look to recruit and invite local programs from the community to engage and present their resources to our parents and students. Students’ and parents’ voices will be heard through Student Council Meetings, PTA and SLT Meetings as well as through one to one conversations with parents. Parents will also be offered leadership opportunities by participating as members on the PTA and SLT executive boards and by serving as volunteers in different aspects of the school.. 4. CSD and school personnel will meet a minimum of twice a month to analyze trends in data and student learning. The Data Sorter will be used to identify the pattern of student absences and steps that can be taken to support the students to decrease their absences. Also, the performance of students at risk of not meeting grade level standards will be discussed and strategies to improve their academic standing will utilized during the school day and after school. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP 45  1-3. The primary focus areas for ACDP are Academic Improvement, Attendance and parental engagement. The school community partners will include but will not be limited to: Principal, Assistant Principals, CSD, Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselors, PTA President, Parent Coordinator, etc. All stakeholders will focus on specific areas (i.e chronic student absences, students that are at risk academically, etc.) that will be addressed during weekly meetings or individual meetings as needed. Data utilized will include students' attendance records, students' performance in class, information gathered through conversations with parents, teachers and students, etc. The community partners will exchange information and be consistent in their communication with each other to ensure that no child is overlooked. A calendar of meetings developed at the beginning of the year and each meeting will be recorded via sign in sheets, agendas, etc. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The partnership with ACDP will allow the Community School to provide students with extended learning time. Adjustments to the school schedule will be made to accommodate a Monday - Friday program from 2:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m (supervised by the CSD) and a Saturday program from 9:00 a.m - 12:00 p.m. (supervised by assistant principals). The Monday - Friday program’s ratio of staff to students will conform with the DYCD protocols of 10:1. A professional development schedule with topics including: Staff protocols, communicating with children, how to handle emergencies, classroom management, lesson planning, curriculum development, teaching techniques and parent engagement will be developed and implemented throughout the year. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The after school and Saturday Programs will commence beginning October of 2018 and end in June of 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: - Rationale: The Wright Brothers School will use Title III Funds to supplement and enhance the instructional opportunities for our ELLs. These supplemental services will be provided during an after school program and a Saturday Academy. Overall, the program will support 98 ELL students in grades 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th (after school Title III will have grades 4th & 5th), (Saturday Academy will have grades 2nd & 3rd). The direct instruction will support language development in English to continue supporting skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing through the content areas as well as through literacy. All instruction is Common Core- aligned to accelerate student achievement. (ELLs in TB, DL and ENL program are included). Student's literacy and writing skills will be enhanced through a balanced literacy approach (i.e shared reading, shared writing, read aloud, guided reading and independent reading (at student's independent reading level). We will use our 2018 ELL Data Analysis Tool to analyze the percentage of students making progress and attaining English Language Proficiency. The analysis of this data will allow us to focus on the achievement or regressed of specific subgroups of ELL's. It will also allow us to identify the more at-risk students and prepare instructional materials that can support their language development. Students receiving instruction were selected based on 2018 EDAT, this includes ENL students who remained at the same proficiency level, regressed 1 or 2 proficiency levels, as well as students who scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on the ELA. - Subgroups and levels of students to be served: The subgroups will be Newcomers, Developing year ELLs, Special Education ELLs, Long-Term ELLs & SIFE students in grades 2, 3, 4 & 5. - Schedule and Duration for after- school program Title III- after-school program will begin on September 26, 2018 until December 20th 2019 for a total of 24 instructional sessions, six (6) teachers. The program will run Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30p.m- 4:00p.m. This is a total of 36 hours per teacher. Total amount for the after school program is $ 13,176 (Inclusive of Fringes). - Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be in English for 6 classes. Integrating ENL strategies and Guided Reading/ Guided Writing practice. There will be six (6) classes in total, with no more than twenty (20) students per class. Instruction will be provided by six (6) ENL/ Bilingual Certified teachers (this will be at cost of the Title III Program budget) - Instructional Outline 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Entering and Emerging and SIFE students will receive direct instruction in literacy skills, this will include Guided Reading to provide differentiated instructional support in order to develop student's reading proficiency, sight words recognition and reading comprehension. Reading A- Z leveled books will be use to provided the Guided Reading instruction. The books and skills are aligned to the Standards. Transitioning and Expanding students will receive additional enrichment support by using Non-Fiction reading and grade Level Text in English. Students will also use ReadWorks articles to continue practicing their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Teachers will track student progress with the TCRWP- Teachers College Reading & Writing (administered throughout the school year), teacher generated assessments and teacher conference notes. - Types of Materials ELL's will receive: Reading A-Z Leveled books, BrainPop videos, non-Fiction Text, and IPADS. Non- Fiction reading and grade leveled text in Science. Each lesson contains specific grade level units (these materials are at no cost to the Title III Program budget). They are as follows: * Unit for grade 3- Living Organisms * Unit for grade 4- Electricity and Magnetism * Unit for grade 5- Earth System and Cycles Teachers will also receive Non- Fiction grade level articles from Read Works.org to enhance student's understanding in each of the units (see description above). Student's will enhance their educational experience through the use of IPADS. - Supervisor Responsibilities: One (1) supervisor for the Title III Program will work per-session during the duration of the program ( 24 sessions, 48 hours). This is a total of $ 3,024 (inclusive of fringes). This will be paid by the Title III program budget as there are no other concurrent programs in session. The supervisor's primary responsibilities include, but are not limited to: Maintaining and managing a safe and secure environment for students and teachers. - Providing program oversight and supporting the teachers in the program (ex.provide materials, manage coverage, lesson feedback, provide guidance, etc). It should be noted that the Title III program requires a supervisor as there are no parallel/concurrent programs running at the school during the time the Title III program is in session. - Supervisor's Schedule (after school Title III) The supervisor will work Wednesdays and Thursdays (when the program is in session) from the hours of 2:55p.m to 5:00pm (this will be paid by the Title III program budget) This is a total of 50 hours for the duration of the program. - Supervisor's Regular School Schedule 6:45am to 2:50pm. Total amount of students in the After School program: 70 ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Title III- Saturday Academy program is projected to be launched on Saturday September 29th, 2018 until Saturday December 22nd, 2019. The program will run on Saturdays for a total of ten (10) sessions. Four (4) teachers for a total of 30 hours per teacher. Total amount for the Title III Saturday Academy is $ 7,320 ( inclusive of fringes). Entering and emerging students will receive more intense, skill-driven activities, whereas the transitioning and expanding students will receive more enrichment. The instructional program for the Saturday Academy ia as follows: 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information - Guided Reading/Just Right Level Text - Fiction and Non-Fiction Text - Academic Vocabulary - A- Z- These are leveled books available in different languages and the skills are aligned to the standards. Total amount of students in the Saturday Academy: 28 -Supervisor's Schedule III (Saturday Academy) One (1) supervisor for the Title III Saturday Academy Program will work per-session during the duration of the program (10) sessions, 40 hours, this is a total amount of $ 2,520 ( inclusive of fringes). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers involved in the Title III program (Direct Instruction- Ten (10) teachers will receive professional development focused around components of " Advance" Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners (Domain 1- Planning & Preparation, Domain 3- Instruction). - Teachers Receiving Training: Ten (10) Teachers (ENL/Bilingual Certified) in the Title III program (Direct Instruction) will be involved in a 1 day Professional Development session focusing on " Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners (Domain 1- Planning and Preparation, Domain 3- Instruction (this will be paid by the Title III Program budget). - Schedule and Duration: 1 day PD session, being 1 hour in length from ( 2:30pm- 3:30pm ) for ten (10) teachers (ENL/Bilingual Certified) will take place September 25th, 2018. - Person Providing Professional Development: One (1) ELL Specialist (Bilingual Certified) will provide the 1 day PD session for the (10) teachers participating in the Title III program (Direct Instruction)- (this will be paid by the Title III Program budget). 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development This is a total of 1 hour 10 teachers, plus the person providing the Pd, plus a supervisor on site. - Topics to be Covered: * Danielson's Framework for Teaching- Domain 1 and 3 Additional Titles of Workshops for all Teachers of ELL's (this is at no cost to the Title III Program budget). Topics are ELL specific related and will take place during the allocated PD mandated time on Mondays as well as during Common Planning time (during the day). * Understanding and Implementing the ELL Data Analysis Tool * Commissioner's Regulation Part 154- On-going (throughout the schools year) * Targets of Measurement (TOM's) * Language Arts Progressions and Performance Level Descriptions (PLDs) * Understanding the Bilingual Common Core Initiative's progressions Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement has a direct positive impact in the learning of our students. We believe the more our parents are involved the more invested our students will be in their education. With this in mind, we will provide literacy/math workshops to parents/ primary caregivers. These workshops will assist parents with the understanding of the school curriculum, and ways in which they can support their children's learning at home (educational strategies for parents to use at home). Our 2018-19 Parent Survey reveals that parents are requesting . * ENL Classes *GED Clases *Computer Classes * Nutrition *Understading my child's IEP The rationale in choosing these activities is to actively engage parents with their children's academic needs and the learning o a Second Language. -Schedule and Duration: 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities A total of (6) workshops will be provided to parents of ELL's . Each workshop will be an 1/ 2 each session during the school day (this is at no cost to the Title III Program). These workshops will be collaborative deliver by the Bilingual Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, ENL teacher as well as the School Librarian. We will be offering ENL classes to the parents of ELL students. Classes will meet Wednesdays and Thursdays after school for an 1/ 2 each session, for a total of 10 sessions starting Wednesday January 9th 2019 ending February 28th, 2019. ENL classes will be provided by a Certified Teacher). Total cost for the Parent ENL classes $ 915 Topics to be covered for parents workshops: - Pathways to Academic Excellence -Early Childhood Literacy Curriculum) - Common Core- Parents will learn expectations for what students should be learning at each grade in order to be prepared for college & career ) - Literacy & Mathematics at home- Activities that parents can do at home to support their child's learning - Reading Aloud to your children ) - Talking with children about books they are reading > Math activities I can do with my Child -Person Providing Workshops: Each workshop will be conducted by the ELL Specialist- Bilingual Certified Teacher (this is at no cost to the Title III Program). ENL classes will be conducted by a Certified Teacher (this is at cost to the Title III Program). - Participants: Parents of ELL students will be the participants of the workshops. Topics of workshops are being differentiated to address the needs of parents. The workshops are presented in the parents home language. In the event that we have parents of ELL students who do not speak the majority language we will utilize translation and interpretation services. Notifications to parents are sent in the home language. Projected number of parents 80 Records of these activities are maintained in the Title III Compliance binder (Room 306 B). This includes agendas, attendance sheets as well as invitations in the parent preferred language. Copies of the same are also kept in the office of the Parent Coordinator. - Notification to Parents Parents will be notified of these activities through the school monthly calendar and fliers, parent association meetings and School Cnxt. Refreshments will be provided for the parents participating in the parental involvement component of the Title III Program (this is at cost to the Title III Program). please note that any additional expenses will be taken from other school funding sources. As an extension of both the After School and Saturday Academy Title III program, our students participate in hydroponic lab. In this lab students have the hands on experience of working in a laboratory that features a hydroponic growing system using a mineral-based solution to nourish 2018-19 CEP 52 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities plants and vegetables. In this lab students are growing herbs, lettuce, cucumbers, and tomatoes. By experiencing this, our ELL's are giving the opportunity to learn the science behind urban farming. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Wright Brothers School Borough Manhattan School Number 028 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Awilda Baez Coach Elizabeth Almonte ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher A. Villalba- ENL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area A. Sidlo - ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area E. Rosario- ENL- Teacher Related-Service Provider G. Alvarado Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Rosa Pena Coach E. Almonte School Counselor E. Araujo Parent R. Diaz Parent Coordinator T. Montano Field Support Center Staff Member G. Alvarado Other (Name and Title) Y. Reinoso- ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 11 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 690 2018-19 CEP 54 Total number of ELLs 257 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 37.25%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): SP If yes, indicate language(s): SP Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 Eng/Sp Lang. Eng/ Sp 1 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 1 3 0 1 1 4 1 1 2 2 0 2 2 5 0 1 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 7 0 0 11 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use are Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP and MOSOL. The skills assessed include the following: - K-2 Concepts of print, letter identification, word identification, and spelling assessment. K-5 Reading Assessment Running Record (Fluency, retelling and literal and Inferential comprehension). The assessments provides teacher with valuable data on students' reading comprehension, decoding, phonological awareness and levels of fluency. The analysis of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school's instructional plan and provide insights on required Tier interventions, if needed. The data also facilitates in the forming of small group instruction (strategy group lessons/guided reading instruction), and scaffold instruction for ELL's. RTI- The school- based response to intervention team uses assessment tools that allows teachers to identify students in need of Tier I, Tier II and Tier III intervention plan. In literacy teachers use the reading level of the student to monitor student 2018-19 CEP 55  growth. In math, daily progress checks and student progress on tiered activities are use to gauge student acquisition of grade level concepts. Teacher- created assessment (e.g, end of unit assessment, exit slips). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place to support this effort include the following: - Guided Reading instruction to provide small group differentiated teaching that will support students in developing their reading proficiency. - Strategy Lessons/ small group instruction - Regularly monitoring of the reading levels both in English and Spanish. Classroom teachers use Fountas & Pinnell Benchmarks to assess students individually. The outcome of this assessment is to determine the reading level of the students. The results as use to inform instruction, identify skills, and strategy lessons that can be taught during small group or guided reading instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Administrators, Teachers teams and ENL team analyzes formative assessment to monitor progress and efficacy of program implementation and student language development. Teachers also use Core Performance task for both language arts and math. Every year we analyze the results of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to determine the progress toward achievement of English Proficiency of our ELL's, as well as the percentage of students exiting the program. The Periodic Assessment (Home Language Arts) is use in the Fall and the Spring to measure the student ability to understand native language context. Teachers use the data from the home language arts assessment to gathered detailed information about students strength and needs in Spanish- language academic literacy and to serve as a resource to help plan individual and group instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been analyzed teachers engage in data-driven PD to decide and implement on effective teaching strategies. Depending on the need of the students teachers design effective teaching plans directly related to students' needs (e.g; small group instruction, strategies lessons). The data gathered is also shared during grade teams meetings to give teachers insight on student performance. . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our schools uses an integrated system of assessment and ongoing data collection for the identification of students struggling to meet academic expectations. Analyzing of the data provides teachers with detailed information about their students' needs in English language development and to serve as a resource to help plan individual and small group instruction. Implementing the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework will also assist teachers to better discern between a learning disability and an issue with language acquisition. The data used for this process includes the following: - Number of years of instruction in a Bilingual or English as a New Language program. - English and Home Language Literacy level. - Student work - Teacher's Assessment - Results on the annual English Language Proficiency Assessment Exam. At Tier 1, teachers use formative data to make revisions to lessons and units. At Tier 2, students who have been screened in need of targeted instruction are provided with Wilson Intervention, Guided reading and/ or Estrellita. At Tier 3, specialized assessments are used to identify possible learning disabilities before recommendation to special education services. During the school year 2017- 2018 our English as a New Language Team and RtI team will continue to meet regularly to analyze and discuss student data and note trends. This data is used to inform 2018-19 CEP 56  professional development, make curricular adjustments and provided targeted interventions to ELL subgroups. RTI- The school- based response to intervention team uses assessment tools that allows teachers to identify students in need of Tier I, Tier II and Tier III intervention plan. In literacy teachers use the reading level of the student to monitor student growth. In math, daily progress checks and student progress on tiered activities are use to gauge student acquisition of grade level concepts. Teacher- created assessment (e.g, end of unit assessment, exit slips). SETTS's teachers use a variety of materials to meet the needs of our ELL's (e.g, graphic organizers, charts and visuals in order to assist students with the understanding of the concept being taught.. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Pending results in September 2018 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures in place to disseminate the data includes: on-going PD sessions with staff, grade meetings with teachers and administrators, administrators spend significant time reviewing/ analyzing students' data with teachers, common planning meetings, response to intervention meetings, ENL meetings, school base support team meetings, and parent meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL instructional program models includes both self-contained , integrated/ stand alone. Students are grouped by grade and heterogeneous. ENL teachers provide the mandated unit of study to all students. Its implementation depends on the proficiency level of the students. (e.g.,Integrated ENL is for all our ELL's regardless of their proficiency levels (these students receive support in the content area and the class stays together as a group). Stand Alone is for Entering and Emerging ELL,s. Our Stand Alone ENL is typically held in the ENL room ( students are not taken out of core classes to receive Stand-Alone. The ENL teacher and content teacher co- teach during the integrated block. ENL teacher provides language support during classroom instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. In our Transitional Bilingual program instruction is provided in both languages Native Language and English. An ENL component is part of the instructional practice to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. A minimum of (2 ) two content area subject is taught in Spanish at the Entering and Emerging levels. Students are grouped according to their English Proficiency Level for small group instruction. Teachers incorporate the Stand-alone to develop English Language skills in order for students to succeed in core content courses, and integrated instruction is implemented to build English language skills through content area instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. In our Dual Language program instruction is provided in both languages (Spanish and English) allowing both ELL's and English Proficient students to meet/ exceed the rigor set in the Common Core. Students in our Dual Language program receive content- area instruction for 50% percent of the academy day in English and 50% percent in Spanish. In addition an ENL component is included to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. A home language 2018-19 CEP 57  arts component is also designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the students' home language. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154 all ELLs receive their full mandated units of ENL and subject content area. The breakdown of total minutes ( integrated/ standalone) are schedule according to the students Language Proficiency Level. Home Language Instructional Support is integrated in all our programs. In our TBE programs students at the entering level receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. In addition, the use of glossaries, dictionaries and materials in the home language are implemented. e.g classrooms libraries, charts supporting content and concepts to support struggling students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered the following ways: ENL- In this model all the instruction is in English, with HL support through the use of HL materials, such as library leveled books, and the use of bilingual glossaries. Native language support is also incorporated through the use of graphic organizers and cognates words to help students who's native language is Spanish understand the content. The ENL Teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher develops instruction for language acquisition and cognitive academic language support. There is also a common preparation time between the 2 teachers. Our Transitional Bilingual program instruction is provided in both languages Native Language and English. An ENL component is part of the instructional practice to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. A minimum of (2 ) two content area subject is taught in the home language at the entering and emerging levels. Students are grouped according to their English Proficiency Level for small group instruction. Teachers incorporate the Stand-alone to develop English Language skills in order for students to succeed in core content courses., and integrated instruction is implemented to build English language skills through content area instruction. In our Dual Language program instruction is provided in two languages (Spanish- English) allowing both ELL's and English Proficient students to meet/ exceed the rigor set in the Common Core. Students in our Dual Language program receive content- area instruction for 50% percent of the academy day in English and 50% percent in Spanish . In all three programs ELLs are provided with glossaries throughout the instructional day as well as for testing accommodations. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that Spanish-speaking ELL's are appropriately assessed with the Spanish LAB. Students in our Dual Language and Transitional Bilingual Classes assess with the Rigby running records. End of unit assessment in Spanish for Math and Literacy. End of unit performance task. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students identified as SIFE receive small group guided and targeted instruction to help fill in gaps in learning, they are also partnered with students who speak the same home language. Furthermore, the schools offers these students participation in 2018-19 CEP 58  our after school Title III tutorial program and Saturday academy. The program is designed to support students in reading comprehension and math. b. ELL students who have been in US school less than three years receive test prep for both ELA and Math. Small group guided and targeted instruction. c. Students within 4-6 years receive test prep for both ELA and Math. These students also participate in our Title III tutorial program and Saturday academy. The program is designed to support students in reading and math. d. Our Long-Term ELL's are provided with integrated instruction by both an ENL teacher and a common-branch teacher in improving academic vocabulary. In addition, long term ELL,s are provided with small group instruction and invited to the Title III after-school program. e. Students who are former ELL's are provided with integrated ENL instruction for 90 minutes per week. Testing accommodation is provided for ELA, Math and Science. All ELL's are provided with word- for- word glossaries through out the year and for testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials teacher of ELL-SWDs use are as follows: - TCRWP running record reading assessment. This data helps teachers identify which level of texts students can read independently and teachers therefore be able to plan reading strategies for small group instruction. High-low interest level reading books are provided, and small guided instruction for all content areas. Teachers use several scaffolding strategies that accesses academic content and accelerate English language development. For example, previewing the instructional focus and discuss key vocabulary, model the given strategy to support students in completing given task, graphic organizer, prompts, cues, and conversations and discussion to allow students to explain and express learning objective . 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by providing small group instruction, integrated teaching with the classroom and the ENL teacher, and targeted tier 2 and tier 3 interventions. In the ICT setting teachers plan/teach collaborative to ensure that instruction is differentiated according to the needs of the students. The school ensures that flexible programming is use to maximize time spent with regular ed peers. We also ensure that our SWDs have as many opportunities with their regular ed peers during school day activities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELL's includes the following: An RtI team meets every 4-6 weeks to discuss specifically the needs of ELL students and identify students in need of Tier 1, Tier II and Tier III intervention. In Literacy, reading levels and curriculum progress checks are utilize to measure student growth/progress. In math daily progress checks and student progress on Tiered activities are utilize to gauge student acquisition of grade level 2018-19 CEP 59  concepts. Small and guided group instruction is also part of our intervention support (i.e. conferring, strategy lessons, group conferring, guided reading, shared reading/writing, Reading Reform and Estrellita) After- School- Saturday Academy is another way in which ELL's are supported in small group instruction for literacy and math. Our Science and Social Studies curriculum mirrors best practices implemented in our literacy block. Both are delivered through whole group and small group instruction. Teachers use a variety of techniques to scaffold instruction and aid comprehension for ELLs, such as use of visuals, sentence starters, building prior knowledge, and the use of cognate words. Content area subjects are taught in the home language in Transitional Bilingual Programs (TBE). In Dual Language Programs (DL) content area subjects are taught in the home language and English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A larger population of ELL's will be invited to participate in the ACDP Afterschool Program to receive support in developing both social and academic skills. In this program the students receive tutoring in areas that help them to develop their oral and written communication skills as well as participate in diverse activities that led to improved social and academic skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As of now, no programs- services will be discontinued at P.S 28 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S 28 all required support services, materials and resources corresponds to ELLs ages and grade levels. In each classroom there are leveled libraries, culturally relevant books to meet the needs of the students at the five (5) proficiency levels. We also provide ELL's with the use of bilingual Glossaries for clarification of vocabulary words during the lessons. Title III after school tutorial and Saturday academy are part of the supplemental support given to ELL's to offer additional support in the content areas. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are various technologies and tools used in supporting and instructing ELL students. At PS 28 there is a focus on assisting students in bridging the digital divide in order to be ready for more rigorous academic challenges. - Promethean Boards: Each classroom is equipped with a Promethean This tool is consistently used by teachers.Teachers make lessons interactive and present materials in visually interesting ways. To further enhance instruction teachers across grade-levels use the SMART board technology to provide engaging and visual support to content area learning. Teachers also use Brain POP videos to build background knowledge. Being able to interact with the Promethean encourages students to collaborate, participate in classroom discussions and demonstrate what they’ve learned. In addition, Promethean boards meet universal design for learning standards, making it easy for teachers to offer students multiple ways to learn both language and lesson material. - Computer Labs - The school maintains two state of the art computer labs, equipped with networked Apple computers and printers, all connected to the Internet via a broadband connection. The technology curriculum compliments the activities in the classroom. The use of computers provides: - Verbal interaction and the use of a variety of language functions by English language learners can be facilitated. - A contextual vocabulary approach that is effective in promoting long-term recall of vocabulary. - An increase in reading interest level for older students while keeping the text simple and easy to read. It also offers immediate feedback on performance, and provide added practice when necessary. - Help develop vocabulary skills and knowledge, can develop their writing skills within small group settings. We also work in-collaboration with the Center for Urban Environment to provide support in the implementation of hands-on science. ELL's also have the opportunity to explore the arts through the content in social studies with the Guggenheim Museum on a 20 week residency. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 60  Native Language support is provided in the ENL program, through the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, library books in the home language. Teachers also use cognates in the content areas to value the home language as an asset for instruction. Trans- language techniques are also embedded in daily lessons to bridge student leaning integrating the student home language. In grades K-2 , English Language Learners receive early literacy native language instruction through the Estrellita program. The Estrellita support teachers in bolstering students oral language and code-based literacy skills (phonic awareness, phonics, and fluency). In an effort to align the NLA to the new ELA (Ready Gen) curriculum, students in the Transitional Bilingual, English Language Learners receive minimum of two (2) content subjects area in the home language as per CR Part 154. Students develop making-meaning and disciplinary literacy skills through content. The curriculum is thematically aligned to the topics of the Ready Gen curriculum in order to expose students to academic language and concepts in their native language, which will help facilitate transfer of conceptual understanding of content and foster second language acquisition. Go Math is also available in the home language. Library books have been purchase to represent the languages of our ELL population. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs learn how to access content and language through rigorous and diverse learning experiences that are aligned to their needs, age, grade level and language proficiency. To ensure that every ELL needs are addressed the school has developed different approaches to support them. They include but are not limited to the following: - All ELLs are provided with their appropriate units of study as delineated under CR-Part 154. - An ELL RtI Team meets regularly to discuss the challenges of newly arrived ELLs as well as long term ELLs and SIFE students. An ESL Specialist develops an individual action plan that provides academic intervention services through the use of varied approaches that include: guided reading, vocabulary enhancement, group discussions and mathematical tactile activities. - ELLs that score on levels 1 or 2 on the Math and ELA State Test, newly arrived ELLs and SIFE students are invited to the Title III After School Program. The students are grouped based on proficiency levels and their academic need. Learning is made accessible to the participants through the use of diverse resources (e.g. ST Math Program, leveled libraries, etc.) that serve to enhance their mathematical, oral and written skills. - The Title III Program is also structured to support the learning of ELLs that are not at-risk. They are supported to successfully achieve grade level standards-based work through the participation in activities that require for them to develop genre-based essays, participate in group discussions and to think critically in order to effectively problem solve. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are various technologies and tools used in supporting and instructing ELL students. At PS 28 there is a focus on assisting students in bridging the digital divide in order to be ready for more rigorous academic challenges. - Promethean boards - Each classroom is equipped with a SMART board. This tool is consistently used by teachers.Teachers make lessons interactive and present materials in visually interesting ways. To further enhance instruction , teachers across grade-levels use the SMART board technology to provide engaging and visual support to content area learning. Teachers also use Brain POP videos to build background knowledge. Being able to interact with the Promethean boards encourages students to collaborate, participate in classroom discussions and demonstrate what they’ve learned. In addition, Promethean boards meet universal design for learning standards, making it easy for teachers to offer students multiple ways to learn both language and lesson material. - Computer Labs - The school maintains two state of the art computer labs, equipped with network Apple computers and printers, all connected to the Internet via a broadband connection. The technology curriculum compliments the activities in the classroom. Use of computers provides: - Verbal interaction and the use of a variety of language functions by English language learners can be facilitated. - A contextual vocabulary approach that is effective in promoting long-term recall of vocabulary. - An increase in reading interest level for older students while keeping the text simple and easy to read. It also offers immediate feedback on performance, and provide added practice when necessary. - Help develop vocabulary skills and knowledge, can develop their writing skills within small group settings. We also work in-collaboration with the Center for Urban Environment to provide support in the implementation of hands-on science. ELL's also have the opportunity to explore the arts through the content in social studies with the Guggenheim Museum on a 20 week residency. 2018-19 CEP 61  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year parents are invited to attend " Curriculum Day", where they meet and greet the teachers, learn about the curriculum and learn ways in which they can assist their children at home. Teachers are involved in weekly grade level common planning meetings. In these planning meetings teachers discuss the curriculum and brainstorm in developing instructional goals/ strategies to support the needs of our English Language Learners. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, P.S 28 does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The model use is as follows: - In Kindergarten & First grade we have self-contain. 2nd & 3rd grade we have side by side, 4th & 5th grade we have self- contain. The integration of the instructional day is 50/50. 50% of the students are ELLs of the same home language, 50% of the students are not ELLs (former ELLs or never ELLs). b. Content area are taught in both languages, English and Spanish. Students receive half of the instruction in English, and half in the other target language. Both languages are used through content areas as well as through literacy. c. d. In Kindergarten the literacy is taught in the student home language first. In grades 1-5 literacy is taught in both languages (simultaneous). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During our professional development, the entire staff receives training on how to best meet the needs of our ELL's in each of the three model programs that we have- DL, TBE and ENL. In September the staff is trained on how to use data to plan effective instruction. Teachers and administrators are trained to analyze and use the ELL Data Analysis Tool. In grades K-5 teachers meet Twice a week during common planning sessions to discuss lessons unit components, chapter assessments, data and pacing calendars. Teachers examine students work and also plan coherent lessons with a language focus while making content accessible to students. We provide teachers, guidance counselors, parent coordinator with ongoing opportunities to attend both on-site and off-site (DELLSS) workshops which reflect current theory based learning practices used for ENL instruction. Providing teachers with effective learning opportunities is the key to increasing student performance. As a result of these workshops, teachers have adopted many of the learning models that support achievement for our ELL population. They are encouraged to work collaboratively in professional learning teams to revise lessons and units 2018-19 CEP 62  of study. Workshops provided by the ENL coordinator and ENL team keeps staff members abreast of ongoing changes in the Language Allocation Policy document. These workshops are provided by our principal, assistant principal, team leaders, bilingual coordinator, as well as from the DELLSS. Professional Development is provided to all staff keeping them abreast of changes CR-PART 154 state regulations for the ELLs. During the month of June, teachers, administrators, school counselor, parent coordinator, school secretaries meet to discuss the incoming students and how they can collaborate to ease the children's transition from one grade to another. They meet to discuss placement, special needs and status of any evaluation that is pending. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend workshops such as: NYSABE, professional learning opportunities offered by DELLSS. All teachers attending workshops will keep an ongoing log of the hours, certificates of attendance, professional development summaries are responsible to turn-key the information/resources shared during weekly meetings with their professional learning teams. Teachers of ENL students participate in all on- site trainings focused on the implementation of the Core Knowledge Language Arts, the Ready Gen Curriculum and Go Math, which are the core curriculum implemented at the school. The core curriculum focuses on the implementation of the common core shifts. In addition, teachers participate in off-site professional development offered by DELLSS to offer additional training on how to provide access to the Common Core Learning Standards for diverse learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides on- going individual meetings with parents of ELLs. The goal is to maintain parents inform of the academic progress of their child. The results of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test is discuss with parents. This information is intended to help families understand the score report of their child. Classroom and ENL teachers meet with parents to share activities and or ideas that can assist them with supporting their children at home at home. The school provides translation services and all documents that go home are presented in the parents preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order to enrich the experience of the parents- guardians of ELL students the school provides parents with a wide range of workshops. - Our parents are invited to visit their child's teacher during "Curriculum Day" at the beginning of the school year, to learn more about the curriculum and ways in which they can assist with the academics at home. -Overview of our ELL programs , LAP document, Use of assessments for the ELLs, Data Driven Instruction (NYSESLAT and NYISTELL), Common Core State Standards. In addition, during our Title III program, we offer the following workshops to parents; - Testing Accommodations for ELLs; How to Help Your Child be Successful on State Test, how to support your child's academic at home. - Cook-shop for Families- This workshop inspire parents/guardian to eat more nutritious foods, it offers our parents the 2018-19 CEP 63  opportunity to cook nutritious recipes at school and home with their families. - Sessions on " Know your rights in Immigration Law" ( sponsored by the Upper Manhattan Domestic Violence Services). - ENL and Technology classes for parents/guardians are offer during the school year. - The school librarian offers Pre-K parent workshops to encourage daily reading at home. Our school library is open for all families on Tuesdays afternoon. - The librarian from the public library is also invited to speak to parents about the different programs available for the family. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Awilda Baez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Wright Brothers School School DBN: 06M028 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) A. Baez R. Pena Title Principal Assistant Principal T. Montano Parent Coordinator A. Villalba NJ. Dones ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent E. Rosario- ENL Teacher/Subject Area Y. Reinoso- ENL Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Almonte N/A E. Araujo M. Ramirez NA. Cohen A. Sidlo Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ENL Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M028 School Name: Wright Brothers School Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Teresa Montano Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation is as follows: During the ELL identification process the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) are offered in the parent preferred language. This includes an interview with the student and parent to determine the home language. -Parents fills out the language preference form indicating language preference. - Home Language report (RHLA) is reviewed to identify the different languages within the school. -The increase in the number of students and families that are Spanish and Arabic speaking such as newly admitted ELLs are clear indicators of the need for translation and interpretation services in Spanish and Arabic. -As part of the school's CEP planning with the School Leadership Team, the school addresses the language assistance needs- this includes: Regular and timely provision of translated documents through existing resources within the school or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Timely provision of interpretation services at group and one-on-one meetings upon request when such services are necessary for parents to communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child's education. The budgetary 2018-19 CEP 67  and staffing resources are used to fulfill those needs in compliance with the notification requirements in Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation- A-663. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The large percentage of students are from Spanish/English English Spanish Arabic Haitian Creole Chinese French Russian Fulani Urdu Croatian Slovenian Wolof N/A 298 563 25 2 1 5 1 1 1 1 N/A 33.15 62.63 33.15 62.63 2.78 0.22 0.11 0.56 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.22 N/A 299 564 299 564 23 2 1 5 1 1 1 2 N/A 33.26 62.74 33.26 62.74 2.56 0.22 0.11 0.56 0.11 0.11 0.22 N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 68  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September Monthly September, Nov., March, & May On- going translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All school generated documents are in the preferred language of the parent /Guardian. At the our school we we ensure that all parent/ Guardian are provided with language support, we do this through the DOE Website, pedagogue or parent volunteer who is proficient in a parents preferred language. The office of Translation Services is also notified to provide assistance. The following Documents are disseminated every year: > Letters indicating student ELL status and placement > Parent Teacher Association notices > Parent Teacher Conference Letters > Letters inviting parents to workshops, > Letters from the DOE & Chancellors office > calendars, & Newsletters > Communication with parents through SchoolCNXT > Family Access Management & NYC Schools Account. 2018-19 CEP 69  N/A N/A On- going Monthly On- going September 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? On- going >Formal face- to-face meetings with parent/guardian to discuss student progress or any parent concerns. >Parent Orientation > Parent Teacher Conferences > Curriculum Overview Meetings with parents >IEP's Meetings September At the our school we ensure that all parent/ Guardian are provided with language support, we do this through the Translation & Interpretation Service, pedagogue or parent volunteer who is proficient in a parents preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 70  N/A N/A N/A September, Nov, March, & May September On- going N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In reaching out to our limited- English proficient families we use school messenger recording in the the parent language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year every staff member has to sign off for the staff hand book. In that book the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 is include. The members are required to read and follow all the information that is in that booklet. There is also ongoing professional development where the regulation is review. The staff the opportunity to ask any questions if there is something they don’t understand. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 71  Notification requirements are displayed visibly at the entrance of the school. The Language Identification Guide and Information Card on Interpretation Services are distributed to staff including the main office, parent waiting area, the lobby area, PTA office and safety agents at the front desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms that we use to gather feedback from the parents includes the school parent survey. Home Language Identification Surveys and parent questionnaire to assess parents needs in terms of language support. 2018-19 CEP 72 
