2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M034 School Name: P.S. 034 FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT Principal: ANGELIKI LOUKATOS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S./ M.S. 34 Franklin Delano Roosevelt 310100010034 Pre-k – 8 th grade School Number (DBN): 01M034 730 East 12 th Street New York, N.Y. 10009 212-228-4433 212-353-1973 Phone Number: Fax: Angeliki Loukatos aloukatos@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 1 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: AngelikiLoukatos Kevin Cusumano JinHunter William Castro JinHunter N/A Anthony Santos District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, New York, N.Y. 10002 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave. 8 th Floor New York, N.Y. 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Angeliki Loukatos Kevin Cusumano JinHunter Deloris Brown JinHunter William Castro Dusha Kameraj Patricia Marrero *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Johanna Charriez Iris Monsegeur Rosemary Morales Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview To prepare students for college and career readiness in an ever-changing society, we at Franklin Delano Roosevelt School are committed to fostering a rigorous and diverse academic environment. We will promote critical thinking skills by utilizing inquiry groups, student centered learning and a focus on literacy in all content areas. We will 2018-19 CEP 9  cultivate positive relationships with all members of the community by implementing programs that support a safe and thriving atmosphere for all learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S./M.S. 34 serves 350 students from Pre-K through grade 8. The student population comprises of 62.57% Hispanic, 28.29% Black, 4.29% Asian, and 3.43% White. The student population includes 8.57% of English Language Learners and 34.57% of Students With Disabilities. Boys account for 49.71% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50.29%. The attendance rate as of June 27, 2017 it is 91.1%. PS/MS 34 offers middle school students the opportunity to become self-reliant, astute learners in an atmosphere that encourages them to develop as thoughtful, caring and intellectual members of the global community. Parents appreciate the supportive learning environment in which teachers know the students well and expect the best from each student. The 2017-18 School Quality Review were Developing but Proficient in multiple areas. Areas of focus cited in the 2017-18 Quality Review were:  Developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework.  Aligning the curricula in an engaging and meaningful way that meets the needs of all learners.  Scaffold and differentiate instruction in order to support students in the creation of meaningful work products. Two areas of Celebration were:  Establishing a culture that communicates high expectations for the entire school community.  Providing teachers and students support to achieve those high expectations. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with Disabilities, ELLs, Students in temporary housing and SIFE students Specific Needs-Differentiation, small classrooms, paraprofessionals, Behavior Intervention Programs/Plans, Social Emotional Learning, Counseling, Academic Interventions (math & reading), tutoring (Science and Social Studies), at-risk social worker counseling, Peer mediation, Restorative Justice, OT, PT, Speech, SETTS, attendance teacher, and community based resources for families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Professional Learning Communities-Analyzing student work and using data to drive instruction. We formed inquiry teams to monitor the progress of students in each class for each grade level, i.e. inferencing, fractions, vocabulary, place values, etc, over a six week cycle and at the end of each cycle, the classroom teachers participated in a gallery walk with their baseline and ending data presented with student work samples. Teachers were able to see the overall 2018-19 CEP 10  progress of the students within the school at each grade level and were able to provide each other with written feedback and suggestions. Teachers were able to articulate specific strategies and lesson adjustments that facilitated student growth and connect to the data they utilized to identify strategies that promoted student advancement through the attainment of the skill. One of our key areas of focus is to increase parental engagement and participation in school wide events and activities. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M034 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 333 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 11 8 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 19 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.4% % Reduced Lunch 7.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.92 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 100 98 89.8% 1.5% 36.6% 31.8% 3.3% 0.9% 0 6% 5.3 15.8% 48% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017, Quality Snapshot, 25 percent of students met the state standards on the New York State English Language Arts Test and 18 percent met the state standards on the New York State Math Test. The school will work to increase the percentage of students that meet standards for ELA and Math. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 74 percent of responders answered positively to questions regarding rigorous instruction, however the data indicated the need for deeper collaboration amongst teachers throughout various content areas. One of the priorities this year is to increase teacher leadership and collaboration via inter-visitation, data inquiry team, utilization of model teachers and implementation of D.O.E. initiatives such as MSQI, TLP and CARP. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will implement data driven instruction within their professional learning communities, MSQI, and CARP initiatives to increase the percentage of students meeting math and ELA state standards by three percent. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities: Teachers Oct-June Administration   Provide professional development (CARP and MSQI) and resources to teachers and paraprofessionals on data driven instruction and teacher collaboration Formulate professional learning communities across content areas between grade level teachers. Implement inter-visitations between teachers to share best practices and improve in specific competencies as indicated by Advance ratings and observation feedback  Based on observations and feedback, from Administrators, teachers will show evidence of increased practice ratings, aligned to the Danielson Framework's competencies 1E- Designing Coherent Instruction, and 3C-Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers will conduct assessment and planning for differentiated instruction, Inquiry-based, project-oriented activities. Activities will reflect strengths, interests and needs of students. Rigorous habits and high order thinking skills are emphasized in curricula , and academic tasks are embedded in a coherent way across grades and subjects so that all learners consistently demonstrate their thinking. Common preps to facilitate grade team meetings so that teachers can collaborate, develop, and plan units of study and analyze student work to inform instruction. Teachers and Paraprofessionals will continue to participate in professional development /Inquiry Team work in order to review data, plan instruction and monitor progress of students. Teachers September-June MSQI Coordinator, MSQI Coach, CARP team,TLP team and model teachers Administration, coaches, grade team leaders, and model teachers Teachers September-June Administration and teacher leaders Teachers, Paraprofessionals September-June Administration, teacher leaders 2018-19 CEP 14 Teacher leaders and teachers will model, co-teach, observe and plan lessons, in alignment with the curriculum maps, in order to improve pedagogical practice and increase student achievement and strengthen the instructional core. Teachers September-June Teacher leaders, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent academic (ELA & Math) workshops, Curriculum Night, First Friday's for Families, continuous communication through online progress monitoring reports, and Skedula online grading tool. Parent representatives will be included in our school wide committee teams to promote events and activities to build an inclusive school community. Key Personnel- Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Staff and PTA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teacher leaders and CARP members will be provided with coverage and per diem/ per session to facilitate professional learning opportunities and inter-visitations. Teachers will receive on site professional development from Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project- funds have been allocated for 10 staff development days for teachers in grades K-5 and 10 days for middle school ELA and special education teachers. The budget amount allocated for TC also includes off site calendar days at TC Columbia University and four PD events for the principal. Teachers in grades K-8 will receive approximately 5 days of Envision (Math curriculum program) on site professional development through funds that have been allocated. A model teacher has been selected to participate in the DOE teacher leadership program and funds have been secured to enable additional compensation required for the teacher to serve in the position for the 2017-2018 school year. Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) funds will be utilized to pay per session for the MSQI coordinator to plan teacher activities associated with the program. Additionally these funds will be utilized for teacher per session as needed for training sessions throughout the year. Two elementary teachers attended a summer Amplify Science training session and will turn key information and activities for teachers in grades K-5 to implement the Amplify Science curriculum. Schedule Adjustments: Professional Learning Communities will be conducted during Monday after school PD time. 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers are given common planning time during the school day by grade level in elementary grades and by content area for middle school grades. SETSS will be a combination of push in and pull out so that this time is aligned with the regular curriculum topics/activities students are being taught in their classes ELL students will receive services as both push in and pull out. The ESL teacher will be provided time to plan with classroom teachers to provide coherent aligned lessons to students. Time scheduled for Wilson Reading and Just Words groups in middle school ELA and Math AIS periods scheduled for students in middle school Instructional Resources: Purchase new Wilson Reading and Just Words student materials Purchase books to build multi-cultural classroom libraries. Purchase Fundations Materials for K-2 Social Studies Passport Purchase Envision Math Workbooks for K-8 Amplify Science curriculum Continue Math IXL and MyOn online subscriptions Sanford Harmony (SEL Curriculum) Restorative Circles by Morningside Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will participate in a peer/vertical inter-visitation to improve instruction in meeting the needs of student learning, turn-key, and share professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 16  Formal and informal observations, formative and summative assessments, and NYS ELA and Math Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the New York City School Survey from 2017-2018, 19 percent agreed or strongly agreed that students at their school treat each other with respect. The data trends indicate there is a greater need to engage the community and incorporate activities that will embrace diversity, inclusion, equity, and develop their social emotional competencies throughout the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/MS 34 will implement peer mediation, restorative justice, and Sanford Harmony programs, in order to increase the percentage of students who felt respected by their peers in the school from 19 percent to 25 percent 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Restorative groups (students, teachers) will conduct needs assessments, surveys to gather information about school safety and school environment and make ongoing changes to promote a positive social emotional learning environment. Teachers students September-June Administration, Teacher Leaders Monthly assemblies to discuss school belief statements and to celebrate student accomplishments (Perfect Attendance, Scholar of the Month) Teachers students October-June Administration Guidance Counselor Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops, Student Assemblies, Diversity Professional Development, Bullying workshops, afterschool programs for the students, SLT, PTA, Title 1 workshop Key Personnel-School Staff and administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources- The dean and coaches will serve as peer mediation facilitators for elementary and middle school students that have been trained as peer mediation leaders. The dean, coaches and peer mediation leaders will continue to receive on-site training throughout the school through Morningside. 2018-19 CEP 19  Parents will participate in restorative circle themed on-site workshops throughout the school year through Morningside. All teachers will be trained in Restorative Circles and Sanford Harmony curriculum. Per-Session for teachers working in the after school remedial program offered twice a week Schedule adjustment: Restorative Circles will be the advisory model utilized and scheduled weekly. Students that serve as peer mediators will have modified schedules on training days. Teachers that have not already been trained will receive restorative circle training that is offered on school days and/or on Saturdays. Teachers will also be provided with the Sanford Harmony SEL program. Teachers have common weekly grade meetings and also a weekly professional period. Teachers are also available to meet on Monday’s professional development time. Instructional Resources: Grade specific Restorative Circle Curriculum provided. Anti-bullying workshops for students and parents ( NED show, school based events, ADA office) Upstanders Pledge Sanford Harmony Classroom Toolkit Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORS data will be evaluated to monitor reductions in incidents by 5 percent in October, 10 percent in March, and 15 percent in June as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 20  OORS data, attendance from all workshops, feedback from teachers and Morningside Center Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: 79% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they are able to receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practices according to the 2016-2017 school quality guide. Needs: 50% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of the teachers will utilize and incorporate Sanford Harmony SEL program to increase the percentage of teachers who feel, according the 2016-2017 New York City School Quality Survey that a lot or all of the teachers at their school help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom from 50% to 60%. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Create a team of staff that focuses on Social Emotional Teachers Well being of students  Provide Professional development in Sanford Harmony September-June Administration Teacher Leader Program  This team will meet on an ongoing basis to collaborate and reflect upon their observations.  Weekly grade meetings to plan and discuss social emotional needs of students and behavioral concerns, also to share of resources and best practice, Lead facilitator Based on observations and administrator feedback, teachers will show evidence of increased Social Emotional practices that impact student achievement and progress through student work samples. Teachers, September -June Administration Regularly on-going professional development that strengthens knowledge of social emotional learning programs. Teachers September-June Administration Use of student surveys inform implementation of social emotional programs. (i.e. Sanford, Restorative Circles, Peer Mediation) Teachers Quarterly Administration Data Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the methods the school will utilize to promote teacher- parent collaboration during Curriculum Night in September, First Friday for families events, Tuesday after school family engagement time and ongoing daily communication through Pupil Path. Parents will also receive workshops for specific topics that are coordinated between the parent coordinator and PTA. The parent coordinator will continue to provide parents with a monthly calendar of events that will be backpacked home and posted on school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  Per Session, Professional Development, Common Planning Time,Professional Learning Communities, Teacher inquiry Team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will collaboratively plan, conduct intervisitations, and participate in data inquiry during weekly PLC on Mondays. Teacher participation will be monitored through agendas and sign in sheets that are maintained google drive. All teachers will participate in ongoing TCRWP PD and Envision Math training.Teacher instructional growth will be monitored through Advance ratings in four-six cycles throughout the year based on teacher selections. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baseline, Benchmark and end of the year assessments. ELA and Math NYS Exams Parents, teachers, and students environmental surveys via google forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our School Quality Snapshot for 2016-2017, shows that only 25% of our students met State Standards on the State English test compares to the city average of 41%. Also 18% of our students met State standards in math compared to the city average of 38%. Based on other needs assessment and data such as the Gains report, School Leadership Team discussions, we have determined the need to focus on improving instructional practice in both Math and ELA to increase students' achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S./M.S. 34 teachers will receive professional development in data inquiry and common planning time that addresses the instructional focus of student engagement within the curriculum that will result in increased student proficiency on state ELA and Math exams by 3 percent. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Development of a school-wide Professional Development plan for Mondays, Chancellor's conference days, and teachers set out of the building to PD's to turnkey information to colleagues. Teachers Sept-June Administration Provide staff with choice of Professional Development via teachers surveys. Implementation of school-wide Professional Development plan Instructional committee, lead teachers, facilitators provide Professional Development in PLC meetings driven through self-directed learning/ tuning student work/ aggregating data. Teachers will create Common Core aligned curriculum maps using the web based program, Rubicon Curriculum Atlas Map. During weekly grade meetings, focus will be on analyzing student work and using data to connect unit goals with differentiated daily lesson plans. Teachers Sept-June Administration Examine and analyze formative and Summative assessments Teachers Sept-June Administration Professional Development for teachers to focus on specific daily effective teaching practices that have multiple entry points . Teachers Sept-June Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent academic (ELA & Math) workshops, Curriculum Night, Family Engagement on Tuesday, First Friday's for Families, Parent Workshop presented by the Manhattan District Attorney's Office, Diversity Committee, quarterly surveys sent to parents regarding family engagement events, Morningside, conflict resolution workshop and Continuous communication through online progress monitoring reports such as Pupil Path. Key Personnel- School Staff and administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: In-house and out of the building professional Development sessions addressing CCLS Units. After School planning sessions for teachers to plan and develop lesson plans. Per session for teachers leading the PLC committee and instructional team activities. Schedule adjustments: Hiring per-diem substitutes to cover teachers schedules so that the can participate in TC, Envision, and MSQI in-house PD's. Hiring per-diem substitues for coverages for teachers engaging in school intervisitations. Also, coverage for teachers participating in district planned school intervisitation PD's/ Instructional Resources: TC units of study and trade packs Envision teacher manuals, student materials, and manipulatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 27  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will work collaboratively in committees and be part of a professional learning community. All teachers will analyze formative assessments and utilize data for daily lesson planning. Progress will be monitored through Advance ratings for 1E- Designing Coherent Instruction and 3D- Using Assessment in Instruction over four- six cycles based on teachers' preference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance from all workshops and committees Feedback from teachers, paraprofessionals and staff Baseline, benchmark, and end of the year assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths-91% of the parents responded that they are very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event Needs-59% of the parents/guardians feel that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the chance to volunteer their time to support their school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will facilitate multiple multicultural family events and increase teacher, student and community cultural sensitivity and awareness from 79% to 82%. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Create and host one family multicultural night to Parents Sept-June Administration increase capacity of diversity in school (i.e. music, food,  Collaborate with staff, family and the school community Students Diversity Committee in regards to understanding the various diverse needs dress, literature, etc. Workshops and information for parents of ELLS and SWDs with a focus on assisting parents on how to support their child at home. Parents Teachers Students Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Parents Sept-June Teachers Parent Coordinator Administration School Based Management Team Professional development for teachers on how to communicate and outreach effectively with parents to increase parent involvement. Teachers Sept-June Administration Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor Model Teachers Monthly School celebrations that all parents can attend, Teachers Sept-June Administration Attendance and Scholar of the Month Assemblies. Monthly meetings with the class parents to give parents opportunities to share any suggestions and concerns. Guidance Counselor Parent coordinator 2018-19 CEP 30  First Friday of the month for families to visit classrooms and observe lessons Teachers Sept-June Administration Parent Coordinator Discuss the Parent Survey at the February and March PTA meetings Family Outreach Engrade online gradebook and communication tool Monthly calendar of events Go Project LeAp workshop Literacy/ Math workshops Cookshop for families Restorative Circles Power My Learning DA office workshops-immigration, domestic violence,community resources, anti-bullying Partnership with the following CBO's -District Attorney's Office -Henry Street Settlement -A place for kids (Elementary After school) -Sonyc -Repertorio Espanol -Go Project -Boys Girls Republic -LES Girls Club 2018-19 CEP 31  -Boys Club -Cafeteria Culture -University Settlement -Cafeteria Culture -Cookshop -Harvey Milk School -Asphalt Green -Power My Learning -Mc Guire Woods Law Firm -NYU Reading Tutors -Junior Achievement -PENCIL -Food Bank NYC -Ryan Nena -Tompkins Square Library -Job Plus -Teatro SEA -Met Life -NY Justice Center -Assemblyman Harvey Epstein -Councilwoman Carlina Rivera -NED Show -GOLES -American Cancer Society -Water Aid -Leukemia Lymphoma Society 2018-19 CEP 32  -ABC Food Tours -Urban Advantage -Con Edison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sonyc, A Place for Kids, Henry Street Settlement, Junior Achievement, Cookshop, Tompkins Square Library, Assistant District Attorney Office, Lower East Side Girls Club, Urban Advantage, Rosie's Kids, Third Street Settlement, Cafe Culture, · McGuire Woods-Electronics , Youth Officer Frasier, Thrive Collective, Partner with Harvey Milk school, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday parent engagement planning time. Parent Workshops can be held on Saturdays during Saturday School and in the afternoon when students are in after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of parents should have attended at least two of the workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys, Attendance from all parent workshops, Parent survey completion rate Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2016 New York State English Language Arts scores and school based assessments 2016 New York State Math scores and school based assessments Performance on school based assessments Performance of school based assessments Teacher referred, Guidance and Administration, Social Worker, Parent Request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Differentiated instruction, Reading Reform, phonics and fluency instruction Small group and one on one instruction Differentiated instruction, skill bases instruction Small group and one on one instruction Differentiated instruction Small group and one on one instruction Differentiated instruction Small group and one on one instruction At Risk Services Small group and one on one instruction During the school day, Saturday Academy, After School Academy During the School Day , After School, Saturday Academy During the School Day, After School, Saturday Academy During the School Day, After School, Saturday Academy During the School day, After School, Saturday Academy 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 48 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide school supplies, field trips, and after school care for all children in temporary housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a hiring Committee that screens and recruits highly qualified teachers/Staff. All candidates are required to conduct a demo lesson and provide at least 3 professional references. The hiring committee has created a hiring packet that includes interview questions and a rubric to rate candidate responses. Teachers that are considered for employment will only be hired when all of the previously mentioned requirements are satisfied.For recruitment, we work in partnership with a variety of Colleges such as New York University, Hunter College and Columbia University Teacher's College. We also utilize job fairs and the NYC DOE hiring list. In order to support high quality teaching, we ensure that staff attends high quality professional development workshops , and in new teacher orientation at the end of August. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are provided with Professional Development Workshops twice a week. These workshops are based on teacher needs and goals. Teachers are sent to workshops and then turnkey to the rest of the staff. Workshops focus on best practices, new research and are aligned to the CCLS and Danielson Framework. Staff attend workshops provided by the UFT and CSA after school, during weekends and Summer months. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 37  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We provide parent workshops focused on CCLS to assist preschool children transition to the elementary school. Day care centers are invited to school tours, with students and parents, during the school day to observe lessons and meet the school community. Teachers team up with other teachers and have the older students become reading Buddies with the students in early childhood classes. Pre-K teacher meets and plans with Kindergarten teachers and share records and information on how to best meet the needs of the students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in planning professional development and setting school goals. Teachers participate in Inquiry teams, grade, and vertical teams. Teachers collaborate and meet weekly to plan, develop, assess and monitor ongoing, grade specific instructional strategies and interventions and assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 262,275.00 2018-19 CEP 38 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 A-E  x x Section 5 A-E Section 5 A-E Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 11,200.00 0 2,494,907.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 39  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy  Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 34 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/MS 34M will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of PS/MS 34’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of PS/MS 34’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 34 ,], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 43  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; . Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in PS/MS 34’S Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Franklin Delano Roosevelt Borough Manhattan School Number 034 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Angeliki Loukatos Coach Lisa Lew ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Su Teacher/Subject Area Wendy Rahaman Seuram/ CT, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Gabriel Goris/ CT, ESL Related-Service Provider Jacqueline Remar Superintendent Carry Chan Assistant Principal Janet Lo Coach Wendy Remar School Counselor Richard Vasquez Parent Jin Hunter Parent Coordinator Ivette Cintron Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 349 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses TCRWP running records, TCRWP letter-sound identification assessments, TCRWP high frequency word assessments, performance assessments, the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The NYSITELL scores provide teachers with basic understanding of the reading, writing, speaking and listening skills of our new ELLs. Throughout the academic year, classroom and/or ENL teachers use running records to assess students’ literacy levels. We administer two ELA performance assessments to measure literacy standards, and have five assessment windows throughout the year to measure their early literacy levels. Every spring, our ELLs take the NYSESLAT, which measures their progress in learning English as a New Language. Our data shows that our ELLs from kindergarten to second grade, even for those who can identify all the letter sounds, struggle with high frequency words at their grade level. The majority of them are below grade reading level. However, all our ELLs in this subgroup (including ELL-SWDs) have progressed throughout the last academic year. 2018-19 CEP 48  ENL teachers and classroom teachers share their findings from different tools in order to provide appropriate instructions. ELLs whose literacy level is below grade level are put in small inquiry groups in which teachers provide instructions based on targeted literacy skills. Teachers who are trained in Wilson Fundations provide lessons on letter-sound identification, and phonemic awareness. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school looks at data from the NYSESLAT to guide instruction. The listening/speaking and reading/writing proficiency levels are used to assess students' strengths and weaknesses. In addition, ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to provide small group instruction by teaching reading strategy lessons or writing to support students through TCRWP instruction. ENL teacher shares information and data in articulation with teachers as ELLs are promoted to the next grade. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? New ELLs are assessed with the NYSITELL. Students who are already identified as ELLs are administered the ELL Periodic Assessment to identify their baseline and MOSLs to measure their progress. An analysis of achievement is given to teachers of each individual student. The item analysis report provides us with detailed information about our ELLs' strengths and weaknesses in English language development. Teachers track the progress of each ELL. They implement strategies in their lessons, and differentiate instructions that focus on each student's needs. The Periodic Assessment reports indicate that reading and writing are the weakest modalities of our ELLs. ELLs from Grades 3 to 8 are struggling with applying learning strategies to examine, interpret and evaluate a variety of materials. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After analyzing the data gathered from the performance tests, periodic assessments, and annual tests, our school identifies ELLs who are not making academic progress at expected rates. Then we administer RtI screening to assess whether their literacy skills and competences are meeting grade level benchmarks. For ELLs who are at risk, our ENL, classroom and subject teachers will collaborate to design instructions to strengthen the skills they need in English language acquisition. Differentiated materials are used to meet the needs for those ELLs. In addition, some ELLs who are deemed SWDs and have an IEP, will receive Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) in literacy and/or math if applicable. After monitoring their progress over an 8-week time frame, if these ELLs are not progressing in targeted skills, they will be referred to our School Based Support Team. Our SBST is made up of the speech teacher, the guidance counselor, the social worker, the school psychologist, and the Special Education specialists/teachers. Students are given interventions according to their areas of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data from ELA, Math and NYSESLAT scores to provide RtI in math and literacy. ELLs who score below English language proficiency are provided support aligned with Academic Intervention Services. Technology programs including IXL for Math and Language A-Z for literacy give support to students. There are also intervention programs utilized in our school, including Fundations, Wilson, Words Their Way, Hooked on Phonics, and Recipe for Reading. At-risk ELLs in grade 6-8 are given academic intervention through small groups, 1:1 academic intervention, peer tutoring, after school support, and Saturday school test prep. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. When our newcomers took the NYSESLAT at the beginning of the year, more elementary ELLs attained an emerging level or higher than secondary ELLs. According to the NYSESLAT Spring 2016, 10 out of 28 ELLs in PS/MS 34 obtained a higher overall proficiency level. Nine out of 28 remained at the same level. The remaining 9 students were beginning level ELLs who tested at the beginning level on the NYSITELL. The ELL Data Analysis Tool shows that our school meets the target scores for the 2016-2017 year because 4 students achieved the proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 49  Students will be monitored for progress through student work and teacher-created assessments. ELL program instruction will be adjusted according to students' areas of need. For example, ENL and RtI support will be given to students who did not achieve the ELL proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. When the data is disseminated, ELL program instruction will be adjusted through changes in grouping. Students who need support in reading will be instructed in guided and shared reading small groups with scaffolding to meet their differentiated needs. Students who need support in writing will be instructed in guided and shared writing small groups with scaffolding to meet their differentiated needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school has a Freestanding ESL program for ELLs from K-8. As per CR Part 154.2, we implement both integrated and standalone ENL models. Our school provides integrated ENL service for all grades. For grades 3 and 6, integrated ELL services are provided by dually certified teachers; for the rest of the grades, an ENL teacher is team-teaching with the common branch or content area teachers. ELLs who have mandated standalone ENL service are grouped heterogeneously between two consecutive grade levels. This is to ensure the gap between grade level’s learning standard is minimal. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. Our school does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs in grades 3 and 6 receive ENL services by their dually certified ENL teachers. ENL teachers incorporate ENL strategies in their lessons, and ELLs obtain mandated number of instructional minutes through small group and differentiated activities. ELLs are grouped in blocks by proficiency level. ELLs receive ENL support daily in different subject areas. ELLs are provided their instructional mandated time, and are programmed into STARS. ELLs in Kindergarten, Grade 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8 receive one unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL services, provided by an ENL teacher with a classroom or content-area teacher in ELA. Commanding ELLs receive .5 unit of study (90 minutes) with integrated ENL per week. Entering and emerging ELLs are grouped heterogeneously between two consecutive grade levels. They receive one unit (180 minutes) of standalone ENL service. Our school meets CR Part 154 time allotments for ELLs through proficiency clustering. Entering and emerging ELLs are provided with two units of study (360 minutes) of ENL instruction per week. Transitioning and expanding ELLs receive one unit of study (180 minutes) of ENL instruction per week; Commanding ELLs receive .5 unit of study (90 minutes) per week. All English Language Learners are programmed into STARS for their mandated minutes. The ENL classroom library has 25% of books in the Home Language. We also provide bilingual glossaries in student's Home Language in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Students are instructed to use these glossaries for Home Language support. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 50  To meet the Common Core Learning Standards in content areas, our school emphasizes teaching academic and vocabulary in Math, Science and Social Studies. In our elementary levels, best practices methodologies are applied using the Sheltered English Instruction model. Content, instruction, and assessments are differentiated, scaffolded, and supplemented with Higher Order Thinking Skills aligned to NYS ESL standards and Common Core ELA and Math learning standards. The ENL teacher supports ELLs by scaffolding curriculum and instruction to make content comprehensible to ELLs. At the middle school level, a balanced literacy approach is in place that follows Teacher’s College Workshop Model for all ELA instruction. Social studies and Science are also part of ENL instruction. Contextual support and academic language development are implemented through peer interaction, visual aids, maps, charts, graphic organizers and manipulatives. During the standalone classes, our ENL teacher designs literacy lessons based on students’ needs in their content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers monitor the journals of students. In addition, small group instruction is provided. Students discuss classwork in their home language and share out their responses in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. a. SIFE Our school does not have any SIFE students. However, our plan for the SIFE population is a content-based approach to language acquisition as well as the in-place ENL methodologies. The ENL teacher will collaborate with subject teachers to differentiate instructions and tasks. The ENL teacher will also incorporate the SIFE Bridges to Academic Success Curriculum, Engaging English Language Learners with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education, and How to Support ELL Students with Interrupted Formal Education provided by the DOE in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. b. Newcomer The plan for newcomers is to provide academic language instruction and scaffolded support for literacy/math strategies. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to identify the language needs for each individual. ELLs are all provided with the opportunity to attend all academic after-school programs, which provide additional ELA and Math support. c. Developing The plan for our developing ELLs is to identify weaknesses in various assessments for planning instruction. One major focus for these students is on their reading and writing modalities. The NYSESLAT scores indicate that these students struggle most in these two areas. Our ENL teachers reinforce the skills for reading and writing, such as brainstorming, organizing, revising, inferring, and higher-order thinking. Throughout the year, our ENL teachers teach these strategies to strengthen students’ abilities. Students also participate in academic after school programs for extra support. d. Long Term The plan for our ELLs receiving 5 to 7 or more years of ENL service is to motivate these students. Our ENL teachers conduct surveys and informal interviews with these students to understand their concerns, academic expectations, and what subjects or topics they are interested in. The data collected can help all teachers to plan lessons that motivate these students. Some long-term ELLs require case studies to determine the specific challenges these students have. Students’ data are analyzed and targeted action plans are designed. All teachers of these students are informed about the plans and implement them in their classroom. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The plan for continuing transitional support for commanding ELLs is that these students are entitled to receive two additional 2018-19 CEP 51  years of ENL service as per CR Part 154. Their ENL service is provided through the integrated ENL model. In terms of testing modifications, they will receive the same modifications as all other ELLs for two years after they pass the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At our school, all ELL-SWDs receive mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction. ELL students who are deemed SWDs and have an IEP are placed in ENL groups that have a small student-to-teacher ratio, so that the teachers can support ELLs’ diverse needs. Our ENL teachers work collaboratively with special education teachers to analyze students’ data, plan for instruction, and differentiate teaching and learning materials. The ENL teacher includes the following SIOP strategies into these lessons: adaptation of content, links to background, links to past learning, modeling, guided practice, independent practice, comprehensible input, hands-on learning, meaningful and rigorous learning tasks that promote engagement, integration of all 4 language processes, varied and flexible learning group options, and ongoing assessment procedures. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The integrated ENL model ensures that ELL-SWDs are included in their content area classes. Classroom, special education and ENL teachers work together designing lessons to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs aligning with their IEPs. Response to Intervention (RtI) approaches will be applied to ELL students who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a reasonable time period. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school provides Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) in English for ELA and Math to help students acquire Academic English. Teachers provide students with small group support for targeted skills and practice. Technology programs such as IXL for Math and Renaissance Learning or Language A-Z resources for Reading and Writing. Tier III intervention is provided by special education teachers in small pull-out groups. ELL-SWDs are provided with special education services as per their IEPs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Student data on NYSESLAT Tests show that our students struggle more with reading and writing compared to listening and speaking. We will use the Learning A-Z online resources to support our students in the modalities of reading and writing. Students will be supplemented with technology reading resources at their reading levels through Newsela.com and Readworks.org. Students will also be given writing prompts and sentence starters to differentiate their writing. In Grades 6-8, data reports through Engradepro will align teachers to grades of ELLs across the content area in support of ELLs learning content area language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school did not have a bilingual program for this school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are provided with the same opportunities as other students in our school. They are invited to join all afterschool extracurricular activities by letters sent home to parents in their preferred language. There are also various ELA and Math academic after school programs and on Saturdays for all students including ELLs. These programs are funded with the Title III program. Extracurricular activities that our school provides are as follows: art, music, basketball, volleyball and student council. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are various instructional materials used to support our ELLs. For example, Words their Way, NYSESLAT Prep books, various texts (for guided reading, shared reading, read alouds) that cover all content area subjects, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, Learning A-Z subscriptions, Google translate, and Renaissance Learning online program. The ENL library 2018-19 CEP 52  also contains various leveled novels in Spanish and English for Independent reading. In Kindergarten to 2nd grade, Fundations/Wilson Program is a multi-sensory language approach for language development. Ebooks on Kindles are provided to 3rd to 8th grade newcomers who are reading at a lower reading level than their classmates. These students can also use the electronic dictionary on the device to assist their learning, especially in content area subjects. Various pictures and photographs are used to help assist in teaching academic vocabulary. Math and science manipulatives are used in content area instruction. All instructional materials are differentiated by academic and grade level. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school currently provides a Freestanding ENL program and home language support is provided when necessary. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in ELA, Math and Science are provided in the students’ home language. Spanish-speaking teachers and paraprofessionals assess students in their home language through surveys, interviews and the Spanish LAB Test. As to learning materials, the ENL library is dedicated to home language books in a multitude of genres and levels. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All service supports correspond to ELLs’ age and grade level. ELLs are grouped between two consecutive standalone ENL classes to ensure the lessons are appropriate for the age and grade level. At the beginning of the year, classroom and content-area teachers are provided with data (e.g. reading level, NYSESLAT result, and anecdotal records) about their upcoming ELLs, so they can supplement their lessons with resources that their ELLs might need. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Various activities and support are provided to newly enrolled students before the beginning of the school year. The new students receive a welcome letter from their new teacher and the letter is translated to languages preferred by their parents/guardians. Our parent coordinator is in close contact with the newly enrolled ELLs family and provides proper assistance to prepare them for the start of the year. New students will also be paired up with a current or former ELL who will be a support and friend for the start of the school year. Parent workshops and PTA meetings are offered by the parent coordinator in the parents’ preferred language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language elective is offered to ELLs in 7th and 8th grade. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 53  Our ENL teachers attend various ENL workshops about compliance and instruction provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. Five workshops are given every school year that address the curriculum and standards for teaching ELLs Academic English. Teachers are also provided opportunities to attend PDs offered by the Manhattan Field Support Center. Teachers of ELLs attend workshops at Columbia Teacher’s College in order to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Our parent coordinator attends ELL-related PD concerning Language Access for families of ELLs. ENL teachers meet with classroom teachers during Professional Learning Community PDs on Monday afternoons to collaborate in teaching ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At the beginning of each year, our staff ensures that all new teachers are aware of the ELL-specific professional level requirements as per CR Part 154:2. Teachers are informed of the different types of ELL-related Professional Development, such as undergraduate and graduate classes, outside and in-house workshops. These workshops can be found through DELLS, UFT, and CTLE. Teachers are also reminded to keep a record of all the ENL trainings they have received. We keep records of agendas, attendance and materials used for in-house professional development in our ENL department binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Besides the mandatory 1:1 ELL parent meeting, parents or guardians are scheduled to have individual meetings with ENL teachers on Tuesdays during parent engagement (2:40 – 3:55pm). For parents who are not able to attend on Tuesdays, our ENL teacher schedules a time when the parent or guardians are available to have a phone conversation. Depending on the preferred language of communication of each parent, our school arranges interpreters – either through bilingual school staff or through the Interpretation & Translation Unit. Our ENL teacher keeps records of phone calls made to parents or guardians regarding the invitation of the meeting. A sign-up sheet, with the agenda, is provided by the ENL teacher, when he/she meets with the parents or guardians. As to meetings that are made through phone calls, the ENL teacher records the date, time and content of the meetings. Documentation is retained in the ENL department. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has various opportunities for parental involvement of all students including ELLs. Parents, or guardians of ELLs are invited, in a letter written in their preferred language, to a Meet and Greet within the first month of school. During the meeting, an ENL teacher describes the ENL model in our school, discusses how our ENL instruction aligns with the CCLS, and answers questions concerning language development of ELLs. In addition, we encourage parents to attend PTA meetings and principal’s breakfasts. Parents also have the opportunity to volunteer as a learning leader or to assist teachers in the classroom. We have in-house interpreters in Spanish, Bengali, and Chinese who can provide translation during these activities, so parents can be involved. Morningside Mediation Program has been collaborating with our school to provide mediation to students. Parent coordinator organizes trips to museums in the city to engage the parents or guardians in our school community. Food Bank for New York City, a non-profit community based organization, provides monthly cook shops for parents in our school. 2018-19 CEP 54  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Angeliki Loukatos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 34 FDR School DBN: 01M034 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Angeliki Loukatos Title Principal Janet Lo Assistant Principal Ivette Cintron Parent Coordinator Mary Su Jin Hunter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Wendy Rahaman Seuram/ CT, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Gabriel Goris/ CT, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Lew Wendy Seuram Coach Coach Richard Vasquez School Counselor Carry Chan Alice Cohen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/27/18 \ 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M034 School Name: FrankliinDelano Roosevelt Superintendent: DaniellaPhilli The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ivette Cintron Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school asks parents to fill out a HLIS form when their child is admitted to the school. Parents are surveyed and interviewed about what language they prefer written and oral communication with the school. Student Emergency Contact cards also have a choice for the parent to indicate the language they prefer letters to be sent home or the spoken language through phone calls. After parents are surveyed with the HLIS, the Home Language is uploaded on ATS so the school community can access the language information of the students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 58  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Chinese English Spanish Bengali Chinese 78% 18% 1% 1% English Spanish Bengali Chinese 79% 19% 1% 1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendar September to June Academic After School November Saturday Academy November NYS Testing information March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conference Information Letter November and March Curriculum Night September Middle School Information April 1:1 parent meetings September to June interpretation service(s)? Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages Parent Coodinator translates to Spanish Language & Translation Unit translates to other languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, letters are given out to students in parents' preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Manhattan Borough Language Access Coordinator, Ms. Urroz, spoke to teachers at our school informing them about language translation and interpretation options they have in the school. She also gave us resources that we can use for parents who need translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 60  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When student is registered, they will receive information about their rights to receive information in the language they speak or read. There is a Welcome Poster in the entrance of the school. School security safety officers and the main office have the language ID guides and cards. LTI Toolkit and binder with the Parents’ Bill of Rights are disseminated at the beginning of the year. Brochures/flyers in different languages from DOE are given to parents. Also, PTA meetings are translated. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the beginning of the school year, parents are asked what language they prefer to receive information. Parent Survey and Selection forms are disseminated to parents of ELLs asking them to indicate their choice of English learning program. 2018-19 CEP 61 
