2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M048 School Name: P.S. 048 P.O. MICHAEL J. BUCZEK Principal: BRYANNA VELAZQUEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 06M048 PO Michael J. Buczek 310600011048 Pre-K-5 4360 Broadway New York, NY 10033 917-521-3800 Phone Number: 917-521-3805 Fax: Tracy Walsh Twalsh@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Tracy Walsh Lori Spector Erneticia Concepcion Jamie Leffert Carolina Angustia none none District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, New York, New York Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917) 521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917) 521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave, 8 th floor, New York, New York 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Tracy Walsh Lori Spector Erneticia Concepcion Theresa Gilbert Iolani Grullon Jose Pena Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jamie Leffert Gabriela Ramos Carolina Angustia Maria Villar Lourdes Cruz Braulia Hidalgo Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The vision at PS 48 is that all members of the school community will be treated with equality, dignity, and respect. We must engage students actively in the learning process while they are working to achieve their full potential as competent, respectful, socially responsible citizens. We must facilitate academic excellence by enabling all students to attain maximum academic achievement. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 48, is in the Washington Heights section of New York City. It is a Pre-K - grade 5 elementary school that services all students including general ed., Students With Disability (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELL). Each grade from K - grade 5 includes a general education class, a dual language class and an ICT class. Our specialty classes include art, gym, library, technology, theatre and social emotional learning (SEL). Partnerships include New Victory Theatre, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, CAT program (Creative, Arts Team), King after school program and ACDP. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our SWDs and ELLs are exposed to our common core aligned curriculum in both ELA and math. Licensed teachers support these students with a variety of strategies including using more visuals, graphic organizers and tiered lesson plans. In addition, SWDs and ELL students use web based resources to support their learning. These software resources include Dreambox, Front Row and ST Math which all tailor learning for the individual students and follow progress throughout the year. These programs could be used at home as well which strengthens the home school connection. Teachers could also track student progress and give further support. Finally, we provide the Title III after-school program to ELL students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One of the elements from Framework for Great Schools where we made the most progress over the past year is our Collaborative Teachers. During our Professional Learning Community time teachers have been able to create study groups on various topics and help facilitate these study groups. Topics during the 2017-18 included math fluency, guided reading, growth mindset, coding, and many more. This year we are going to focus more on inter visitations in cycles with a focus on the Framework of Teaching. Teachers responded positively to our cycle on Inter visitations last school year and as a result we will work in cycles. Teachers also meet in weekly teacher team meetings facilitated by teacher leads who help drive our Instructional Focus and School Goals. Finally, our scoring time on Tuesday afternoons is done collaboratively. We have three key areas to focus on this year and they are indicated on our 90/90/90 plan. The three areas are as follows: Frequent assessment of student progress and multiple opportunities for improvement.   Collaborative scoring of student work.  An emphasis on non fiction writing. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M048 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 543 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 39 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.4% % Reduced Lunch 33.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 94.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 19.09 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 66% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 78 24 93.3% 2.2% 24.9% 1.1% 0.9% 0.4% 4 2% 7.5 17.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Now that we have a uniform curriculum for math and literacy in the content area, we are better able to focus on reflecting and revising rather than creation and we are better poised to engage in study groups in cycles to support teacher pedagogy. In math, we have adopted GoMath as our CCLS-aligned program. To date we have: created a common lesson-planning template that allows for similar structures across the grades, selected common assessments to track student performance and progress, and incorporated higher-order questioning to ensure students are thoroughly supporting their answers. We are currently working at focusing on students being more productive at solving and helping them solidify the skills they need to be successful at solving. We have also adopted ReadyGen and have purchased the biliteracy component for our dual language classrooms. In literacy we have: created resource libraries, designed unit concept boards, revised writing tasks to suit the learners, and incorporated team talk into lessons to insure students are using evidence to support their answers and claims. With uniform curricula in place, teachers are able to focus their efforts on revising instruction and assessments to meet the needs of all learners including our ELL population and SWD. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students in grades K-5 will make one level gain in targeted writing indicators (Focus, Development, Organization) as measured by Common Core aligned tasks. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Use of school wide Common Assessments. Teachers in All Students Sept. 2018- All Staff June 2019 grades K-5 will be administering on demand writing assessments 4 times throughout the year. The writing assessments are aligned to the CCLS and will be scored using the same rubrics. Teacher Teams will collaboratively score and analyze the results tracking 3 specific writing indicators: focus, development, and organization. This work will inform the instructional decisions teachers make to support student learning.  Use of weekly Professional Learning Community time for understand the Framework for Teaching and as it relates to the instructional domains. Teachers participate in a cycle of intervisistations that require them to collaboratively discuss their instructional choices and outcomes on student learning. ELL strategies are embedded into the instruction to assist all learners. All Students Sept. 2018- All Staff June 2019  Facilitate evidence based thinking, discussions and writing through implementation of school-wide discussion protocol “turn and talk, such as hand signals and Accountable talk. All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 All Staff All Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019. All Staff  Use of student work and formative/summative/common and differentiated assessments to inform the process and progress as it relates to meeting the school’s instructional focus.  Teachers will use small group instruction to address the needs identified through the daily assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and homework nights will be planned in the fall by grade team leads and instructional cabinet, in addition to events such as Back to School Night, our online communication systems, and monthly curriculum newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher team meetings in order to score, and analyze the data. UFT teacher center coach, Literacy coach and Universal Literacy coach to work with the teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will check the progress made by students and offer more support to those not making progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The data collected on the Google Drive. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school community uses the Framework for Teaching during a frequent observation cycle to assess and support teacher practice and student achievement. As such, we have developed a comprehensive calendar to inform and monitor this work. This system allows for all teachers to be involved in an observation process built around a common rubric of effective teaching practices and a process that incorporates relevant feedback with actionable next steps. As such during our visits we are able to pay close attention to effective teaching practices during the delivery of lessons. We continually focus on student engagement, questioning, discussion, and ways in which teachers are differentiating their instruction to meet the needs of all of our students. Particular attention is paid to our ELLs and SWDs to ensure that they are given suitable access to the curriculum and provided with ways in which to show mastery of the skill. Furthermore, this process enables teachers to engage in structured professional conversations using a shared language to improve their practice. Additionally, given our internally developed tracking system, we are able to monitor teachers’ performance and progress relative to each of the components and thereby make targeted decisions around professional development and other needed next steps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all SWDs and ELLs will make a gain of one grade level as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading scores and a .5level gain in targeted writing indicators (Focus, Development, Organization) as measured by Common Core aligned tasks. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The curriculum is aligned to the CCLS, such that students are engaged in a variety of grade-level texts (including a significant increase in non-fiction texts), exposed to challenging and rigorous work, are required to justify their answers both in literacy in the content areas (text-based evidence) and in math (using Cube method for problem solving), thus being supported to become independent learners. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SWD, ELL, SIFE Sept. 2018- June 2019. Staff  Our academic tasks come from our two programs: ReadyGen and GoMath!/Engage NY which provide rigorous grade-level standard based tasks for students, as well as the necessary scaffolds to provide multiple access points for ELL and SWDs. Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Staff  Use of DOK (levels 1-4) to ensure our questions, tasks, and student thinking involve higher-order thinking and tasks.  The process for adjusting and refining curriculum is strategically embedded in the structure of our teacher team meetings and professional study teams. Teachers are given time to meet in grade-level groups and cross-grade content areas in order to examine both the curriculum and student data in order to make appropriate revisions. Staff Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019  Use of student work and formative/summative/common and differentiated assessments inform the process. Staff Sept. 2017 - June 2018. Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and homework nights will be planned in the fall by grade team leads and instructional cabinet, in addition to events such as Back to School Night, our online communication systems, and monthly curriciulum newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The UFT teacher center will provide professional learning., through additional Professional Learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will examine the Fontas and Pinnell scores of ENL and Sp Ed students to assure they are making progress towards meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. On demand tasks, Fontas and Pinnell, extended responses(Math) , operational skills inventory. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following structures support our teacher team meetings:  Teachers meet in team meetings once a week to analyze student work and use data/observations to inform our goals for the year. Team meetings are flexible based on grade-level needs. The use of student trackers with on-going data in math, reading, and writing, keeps conversations focused on using data throughout the process.  Our Professional Learning Community time on Mondays is structured as collaborative study Groups, which provides staff with ongoing professional development with our school goal, focus and the Framework for Teaching in mind.  We established a Google Docs for Education domain four years ago and the drive is where we have our   curriculum calendar, curricula maps, trackers and other documents to share. Swing periods are a structure built into the prep schedule around identifying targeted needs with flexible agendas. Instructional/Administrative Cabinet meetings help plan the professional development and coaching of teachers.  We created a professional learning calendar that has all upcoming PLC sessions and teacher team meetings.  Most scoring on Tuesday afternoons are done collaboratively. Teachers review tasks, norm the scoring and analyze student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will be implement techniques learned during professional learning time in lesson planning and pedagogical practices as evidenced by Advance data. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  By June 2018, 100% of all teachers will be involved in ongoing professional development in our weekly Teacher Team meetings and our weekly study groups during our Professional Learning Community time. Staff Sept. 20178-June 2019  Teacher leads in each grade facilitate teacher team Staff meetings where they set agendas for PLC learning to the schools work around for curriculum development, assessing, scoring and planning to reteach. Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Staff - Administration, coaches, Instructional Staff and Teacher Leads. Teacher leads with support from administration and coaches.  Swing periods target work by groups and/or committees to work collaboratively on school initiatives. Ex: Technology Committee Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Group facilitators, administration, teacher leads and coaches. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and homework nights will be planned in the fall by grade team leads and instructional cabinet, in addition to events such as Back to School Night, our online communication systems, and monthly curriciulum newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Lead teachers, time on Monday afternoon, common prep time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 19  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will look at the data generated in Advanced and feedback give to teachers which will focus on Pedagogical practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation reports and Advanced data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We realize the best way to ensure that students are learning is to have effective or highly effective teachers in our classrooms. We need to leverage higher order thinking and questions during all lessons. With a focus on teachers growth through Professional Learning Opportunities, there will be a focus on student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of classroom teachers will achieve a minimum of an overall “effective”, based on the Danielson Framework of Teaching, measured by frequent observations. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will participate in observation cycles with their supervisor a minimum of 4-6 times per year. All instructional staff September-June Administrators All teachers will engage in beginning of the year and end of the year conversations with supervisors to discuss goals and areas of improvement. All instructional staff September-June Administrators Weekly teacher team meetings and weekly PLC’s facilitated by teacher team leads and coaches to provide PD supports (including intervisitations) to staff aligned to cycles of inquiry. Grade teams September-Coaches June Adoption of Teach Boost computer system to archive instructional artifacts and provide data monitoring & analysis supports to compliment ADVANCE system. All instructional staff October- Administrators June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and homework nights will be planned in the fall by grade team leads and instructional cabinet, in addition to events such as Back to School Night, our online communication systems, and monthly curriciulum newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule intervisitations on a four week cycle/Data inquiry in three week cycles. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will look at the observation data to target extra PL areas during PLC time and coaching cycles. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation reports and Advanced data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our parents will be receiving a monthly newsletter this school year to provide what is happening in each grade monthly. Parents will also be receiving a newsletter monthly sent home with their child highlighting what is going on in classrooms for that month. Teachers will be sending a bi monthly reports of students grades. Parents will be able to set up appointments to discuss student progress. Coaches will be setting up family nights to help understand to curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the number of parents/guardians will be engaged in academic communication with teachers at least five times per year where they are given their students progress towards meeting academic goals for the year with knowledge of the current curriculum and next steps as evidence by a 5% increase in the School Parent Survey. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Provide regular, ongoing communication with families Families about student academic and social achievement progress and outcomes. Fall 2018-June 2019 All teachers  Meeting with parents a minimum of 5 times per year. students  Parent coordinator and coaches plan curriculum nights. Parents parents  Monthly Curriculum newsletters Parents School staff Parent Coordinator and Coaches. Grade leads October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-May 2019 October 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Workshops and homework nights will be planned in the fall by grade team leads and instructional cabinet, in addition to events such as Back to School Night, our online communication systems, and monthly curriciulum newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Curriculum Nights, newsletters, workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 parents will have meet with teachers a minimum of three times. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student portfolios include minimum of 4 parent signatures, checking progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that are between 1 and 2 years behind as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments. Students that do not meet key standards as measured by unit tests. Students that do not meet key standards as measured by the writing tracker Students that do not meet key standards and measured by the writing tracker. Students discussed during PPC as needing support in social situations, or whose family has had a traumatic event Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading, Guided Writing Small groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school. Guided Math Groups Small groups Guided Writing Small groups Guided Writing Small groups During the school day and after school. During the school day During the school day Assist students in dealing with personal issues, including school, friends, family and current events. One to one During the school day Small groups 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide at-risk counseling services. Also we provide school uniforms, book bags and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 28  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 CEP 29  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Attend Hiring Fairs  Use the Teacher Finder web site  Coordinate with Human Resource Personnel  Match new teachers with mentors 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have teacher leads which meet with coaches and administration to set the the professional learning for the year. They in turn meet with their grades, look at student work, students data and planning. In addition as a school we are targeting the Framework for Teaching Components, and the teachers are conducting intervisitations to raise teacher practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our two Pre-K classes are engaged in a math curriculum called Building blocks. As these students transition to Kindergarten they receive the High-5 club to support math development. Pre-K students also are included in the speciality classes such as , Technology, Art, Gym, Theatre and Library. Parents tour our school to become familiar with our school culture and to better understand ou special programs. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our grade level teachers decide on the assessments in Math and ELA to be tracked during Teacher Team meetings. The assessments are connected to our math and ELA curriculum and assess progress and assist in grouping students. Our professional learning includes using multiple protocols to look at strength and weakness of our students and adjust accordingly. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 385,655.00 2018-19 CEP 31 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Action Plan  Title II, Part A Federal 100,451.00 Title III, Part A Federal 22,336.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,305,926.00 x x x Section 5 Action Plan Section 5 Action Plan Section 5 Action Plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 32  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.O Michael J. Buczek School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 48 PO Michael J. Buczek School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 CEP 34  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 48 PO Michael J. Buczek School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 36  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 37  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 40  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 48M is a neighborhood Pre-K through grade 5 school comprised of 480 students and has approximately 175 ELL students. Of those 175 ELLs, the overwhelming majority speak Spanish as their native language, although other languages represented at our school include Arabic, French, and Mandarin Chinese. The number of ELL students is based upon the results of the 2018 NYSITELL and 2018 NYSESLAT. These ELL students are placed into self-contained ESL classes and Dual Language classes across the grades from kindergarten through fifth grade. Each grade, kindergarten through fifth, contains both a self-contained ESL class as well as a Dual Language Spanish class. The ESL classes are all taught by licensed ESL teachers and the Dual Language Spanish classes are taught by licensed bilingual Spanish teachers. English and Spanish are taught on alternate days in the Dual Language classes. PS 48 will be using the EDAT data analysis tool to help make informed decisions about the selection of the students that will be invited to attend the Title-3 Supplemental Program. The students that will be given priority into the program are those that did not make a gain of at least one level on the NYSESLAT exam in 2018, or in some cases, student who regressed a level on the 2018 NYSESLAT. The large majority of these students scored a level of either Transitioning or Expanding on the NYSESLAT. After carefully analyzing the data, the targeted students were grouped according to their proficiency levels. In an effort to also include SIFE students new to the school system, a student group was formed that is comprised of students with a level of either Entering or Emerging on the NYSITELL. Title-3 teachers will emphasize instruction for the Title-3 Supplemental Program based on NYSESLAT and NYSITELL levels, taking into account their students' specific needs in terms of the four modalities of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The language of instruction in the Title-3 program will be English, and by its design, the program will supplement the work done by ESL and Dual Language classroom teachers during the normal school day by offering additional instructional time and small group instruction in a concerted effort to meet the identified language needs of the students. For the 2018-2019 school year, the Title-3 program will consist of five groups, with one fully certified teacher for each group, and 8-10 students in each group. Each group will meet twice a week after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays for one and a half hours each session, from 2:25pm until 3:55pm. The four groups will meet for a total of three hours per week, for a total of 23 weeks. There will be a total of 46 sessions, each 1.5 hours long, at a total cost of $20,924. The program will begin on Wednesday, October 17, 2018 and continue until Thursday, May 9, 2019, with a few days worth of exceptions. There will be no Title-3 on Thursday, November 22, 2018 because it is a holiday. There will also be a small break in services from Wednesday, December 19, 2018 until Thursday, January 10, 2019. Group one will be led by a Dual Language teacher and be comprised of 8 students who are either identified as SIFE students and/or newcomers to the school system. The students will vary in grade level from grade three to grade five, and all are either level Entering or Emerging based on their most recent NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. 2018-19 CEP 41  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Group two will be led by an Special Ed teacher and be comprised of 8 students. Five of the students are fifth graders, and three are fourth graders. All students in this group have a recent NYSESLAT score of either Transitioning and showed little to no growth as compared to their previous year's NYSESLAT score. Group three will be led by an ESL teacher and be comprised of 8 students. Al eight of the students are fifth graders. All of the students achieved a level of Expanding on the 2018 NYSESLAT. Group four will be led by an ESL teacher and will be comprised of 6 third grade students and 2 fourth graders, who all scored Transitioning on the 2018 NYSESLAT. Groupo five will be led by a GenEd teacher and will be comprised of seven fourth graders and one fifth grader, all of whom scored a level of Expanding on the 2018 NYSESLAT. There will be a varied list of materials for instruction that we will utilize to help us achieve the academic and linguistic growth we are aiming for with the supplemental Title-3 program this year. As the students' needs span across the four modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing, we will attempt to address each of the modalities in part. But the majority of the students are having particular struggles with reading and writing, so we will specifically target those areas. Our school has just purchased a wide-ranging leveled guided reading program from Attanasio & Associates that will target our students' highlighted needs in the four modalities, while at the same time differentiating the instruction for the discrepancies in development levels. There will also be professional development offered around these materials, markedly how to efficiently implement them into their classes for targeted instruction, which will be led by the ELL coordinator and/or Assistant Principal at a small cost to the Title- 3 program, which is discussed in the Professional Development section. This professional development will only be for the four Title-3 teachers. In addition to the materials from Guided Reading Program from Attanasio & Associates we will also be incorporating new and engaging software applications into the instruction, taking advantage of new hardware and technology in our school building. Two software programs in particular we will utilize include: EPIC and ST MATH. EPIC is a literacy based software program that offers lessons, supports, and has been recently updated to include comprehension quizzes at the end of each reading passage. ST MATH is a mathematically based software program that meets students are their ability level and pushes them to develop their computational and reasoning skills. Our hope here is that these skills will transfer to problem solving skills that will help them prepare for breaking down more complex and multi-step problems that become more and more language based as the years go on. This is especially true of the state exams, which become increasingly more difficult for ELLs because of a heavy amount of word problems that rely on language skills in order to correctly solve the problems. In the new arrival Title-3 group (group one), we will also implement an intensive phonemic awareness program called Fundations. This program is targeted at these students specifically because of their particular elementary needs in the English language such as learning how to identify and pronounce phonemes and establishing a phonetic awareness in them. Above and beyond these key components of Title-3 instruction, teachers will also be using student notebooks for journal writing, and teacher-student correspondence. Students will also develop descriptive writing paragraphs by looking at teacher selected pictures and creating stories about them. Woven throughout these writing activities teachers will also organically instruct students in the laws and rules of English grammar and spelling. 2018-19 CEP 42  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will take place in the Title-3 Supplemental Program throughout the duration of the program, from October through May. Sessions will take place once every other month, on the last Thursday of the month, for a duration of one hour each session. This will cost a total of $1,213 to the Title-3 program. The ELL coordinator, the Literacy Coach, the Math Coach, and the Assistant Principal will work jointly to plan and implement these professional development sessions. The recipients of the professional development will be the four selected Title-3 instructors. The initial professional development session will be conducted over one session prior to the launch of the the Title-3 Supplemental After-School Program and will be held on Thursday, October 11, 2018. At this meeting, the Title-3 teachers will be exposed to the new Attanasio & Associates materials, as well as the software programs of EPIC and ST MATH. The teachers will collaborate in the instructional planning and select appropriate materials and develop goals for their individual Title-3 students. There will be three additional professional development sessions throughout the 2018-2019 school year. After a careful analysis of the data using the EDAT tool, it became clear that the most immediate needs for the majority of the Title-3 students revolve around reading and writing. That being said, a driving focus this year will include many writing based strategies. On December 20, 2018, we will investigate "How to promote oral language development with SIFE students and Emerging ELLs." On February 28, 2019, we will explore the topic of "How to be successful with guided reading." And finally, on April 18, 2019, we will work together on "Preparing for the NYSESLAT", as well as reflecting on best teaching practices throughout the Title-3 Supplemental Program in an effort to be even more effective in delivering relevant and targeted instruction in the coming academic year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: There will be several parent informational meetings throughout the duration of the Title-3 program, at a small cost of $400 to the Title-3 program which will be used on food, read-aloud books, etc. These are slated to take place during the Tuesday afternoon period labeled "Parent Engagement Time" on the third Tuesday of each month and were all developed and created based on feedback from meetings between both the parents and the teachers. This meeting time was the time requested by the parents and teachers alike. All of the meetings will be prepared for, and led, by the ELL coordinator, and/or the Assistant Principal, the Math Coach, 2018-19 CEP 43 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and the Literacy Coach. A letter will be sent home in both English and Spanish to the parents of the targeted Title-3 students ahead of each meeting to alert the parents to the upcoming activities. And due to our bilingual staff members, all meetings will be conducted in both English and Spanish as well. The first meeting will take place on Tuesday, November 20, 2018, and focus on "How to setup an email account and use electronic apps." On December 18, 2018, we will talk about "How to know your student's goals in school." On January 15, 2019, we will discuss "How to promote reading at home." On February 28, 2019, we will discuss "How to do guided reading with your child at home." And our last meeting on April 16, 2019, we will have a reflection period with the parents to review the efficacy of the Title-3 program and to discuss opportunities for the summer and the Title-3 program in the 2019-2020 school year. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 6 School Name PO Michael J. Buczek Borough Manhattan School Number 48 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tracy Walsh Coach Jamie Leffert ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jonathan Hogan Teacher/Subject Area Antonio Melendez Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Austrie Related-Service Provider Tabitha Lopez Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Zoraida Hernandez Coach Kayla McCormack School Counselor Rosario Saldana Parent Erneticia Concepcion Parent Coordinator Arlene Tavarez Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Chinomso Ejiogu C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 10 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 9 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) - Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 5 - Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 45  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) SELECT ONEYesNo K 1 2 Spanish SELECT ONEYesNo 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 2006 0 2006 6 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 7 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 8 1 1 9 1 1 10 11 12 Tot # 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2012 0 0 2012 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 46  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use Fountas & Pinnell diagnostic reading assessments in both English and Spanish, as well as teacher-created assessments in both mathematics and literacy. In addition to these, we use more formal assessments from both our mathematics and literacy curriculum. In literacy, we use ReadyGen, and the assessments include a stand-alone writing performance task at the end of each unit of study, as well as a performance based assessment that the students develop throughout their examination of the unit of study. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Classroom teachers (GenEd, self-contained ENL, ICT) meet in weekly grade meetings to discuss instructional planning, best teaching practices, etc, and often these meetings involve interpreting data trends and assessment results to better meet our ELL students’ needs. Decisions are made by the teachers with input from both coaches and administration. Additionally, every Monday we have two “swing” periods built into our schedule where teachers can meet to help guide instructional planning. At least once a month, these meetings are reserved for vertical grade meetings (K-5) between DL and self-contained ENL teachers to further support the efforts undertaken by teachers during their weekly grade meetings. The data we collect from formative and summative assessments is uploaded into our school’s google domain, where it can be easily accessed and discussed among teachers, coaches, and administrators alike. b. TBE program. If applicable. We use performance tasks from both our literacy & mathematics curriculum to help identify student need, as well as to track student progress and highlight particular areas of student need. In literacy, we use ReadyGen’s performance tasks at the end of each module of study. In mathematics, we administer a baseline assessment in September. Throughout the year to check student progress, we administer a beginning/middle/end of year test. Additionally, each mathematics chapter includes a mid-chapter test, a chapter exam, as well as a performance task c. DL program. If applicable. First, the instructional cabinet would meet and decide what the best course of action to take would be, taking into full account the results gathered from the summative data. This will be of especial importance at the beginning of the year after the baseline assessments have been administered and scored. The instructional cabinet’s decision leads us to set up an intervention schedule for our AIS service providers such that they can maximize the amount of instructional time they provide the students with the most prevalent academic needs. We also employ several F 2018-19 CEP 47  status employees that come to our school between two and three days a week that provide additional focused small group instruction in the highest areas of student need. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At PS 48M, data is used to guide instruction. ELLs who need intervention receive Fundations, as well as Tier I and Tier II support services. These services are provided by the classroom teacher, with Tier II services being specifically done in small groups, consisting of no more than six students. Every ten sessions, students are tested to measure their progress. If any student does not master the material by then, the student would then be placed in a smaller group to afford the child more attention. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use data from all of the formal statewide assessments when evaluating and making decisions revolving around our ELL programs. These assessments include the NYSESLAT, the ELA exam, the Mathematics exam, and the 4th grade Science performance and written exams. Additionally, we also use results from the Spanish ELE exam. We are also using the EDAT tool and its functions to further evaluate and inform instruction for our ELL programs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have a leadership cabinet which meets weekly to discuss any and all relevant and important issues that affect the school. This cabinet is comprised of: the principal, two assistant principals, the literacy coach, the math coach, the special ed coordinator, and the ell coordinator/testing coordinator. One of the key responsibilities of the group is to efficiently interpret testing data and make policy/curricular changes based on these findings and conclusions. In turn, the cabinet then distributes a weekly newsletter to the entire staff alerting them to any necessary changes. The school also has a large amount of data collected and stored in a Google domain, which includes all recent test scores, Fountas & Pinnell levels, and writing performance task grades. Staff members can access this information at any time through the Google drive, which also includes numerous and varied curriculum maps, pacing calendars, as well as copious amounts of ELL resources and lesson plans. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At PS 48, ENL is delivered through both the stand alone and integrated ENL instructional models. Standalone ENL: Students receive English development instruction by an ENL certified ESOL teacher in order to acquire the English language needed for success in content areas. Integrated ENL: Students receive core content area instruction and English language development instruction including home language supports and appropriate ELL scaffolds. Teachers pair students of various language proficiencies to support each other in the home language and English, online dictionaries, books, etc., to provide home language support in ENL instruction. Students performing at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes per week. Students performing at the transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 minutes per week. And students performing at the commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL for an additional two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? NA 2018-19 CEP 48  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Since more than 80% of our dual language student population come from the same home background and speak the same home language, our school delivers dual language instruction using a one-way program. Students receive exactly half of their instruction in English and half of their instruction in Spanish, their hoe language. DL students in grades K-5 receive both English and home language instruction by a certified bilingual teacher in order to acquire the English language and target language needed for success in core content areas. Our dual language program alternates days, which means that our students receive instruction one day in English, and the following day in Spanish. This specifically means that students learn to read and write in both languages. For our newly arrived immigrant ELLs, students receive extra literacy and reading time in an effort to bolster their efforts at language acquisition. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In Kindergarten, first, second, third, fourth, and fifth grade Dual Language classes, academic instruction is offered 50% of the time in English and 50% of the time in the Home Language, Spanish. The language of instruction alternates each day. Students at the entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding levels of English language proficiency in these classes receive certified ENL instruction for 1,305 minutes per week from a qualified instructor, as evidenced by programming in STARS. Former ELLs (who scored commanding on the most recent NYSESLAT) in these classes continue to receive the same certified ENL services for an additional two years. In the Freestanding ENL classes, instruction is delivered 100% of the time by a qualified and certified ENL instructor. Therefore, entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding students all receive at least their mandated number of instructional minutes, but in most cases, as the students are with the same teacher all day long and instructed in all content areas by that same teacher, the ENL instruction provided is usually 1,305 minutes per week. Former ELLs in these classes, who are still entitled to ENL services for two additional years, are provided with the same number of minutes of instruction. These minutes are also all verified and deemed compliant by tracking in the STARS grading system. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In our Dual Language program, all content areas are delivered in both languages according to the schedule. Our schedule is composed of 8 periods per day, each lasting approximately 45 minutes. One period is reserved for lunch, and a second period is reserved for a cluster class (gym, art, theater, technology, etc). The remaining six periods each day are for content area instructions (reading, writing, math, science, etc.) All other models provide instruction in English while accessing home language to allow students to construct meaning, either through turn-and-talks or other collaborative structures. Teachers scaffold instruction through the use of realia, visuals, and explicit frontloading of vocabulary and language structures. Our school leadership emphasizes cooperative learning in the classroom setting. Literacy is developed through content area instruction. We utilize a balanced literacy approach, where the teacher first introduces the day’s essential question to the entire class through a mini-lesson, after which an independent work period is carried out by the students in the class. During this independent work time, focused, small group instruction is differentiated and carried out by the teacher. This takes a variety of forms such as guided reading groups, book clubs, stations, games, etc. These activities are employed in all content area instruction such as reading, writing, and mathematics, etc. These presentations, along with numerous and varied other lessons and resources, are available in our school’s Google domain. In science, teacher guided experiments and hands-on exploration provides language experiences which are complemented with explicit vocabulary instruction. Vocabulary word walls (with accompanying visuals) support both language and content area instruction. 2018-19 CEP 49  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language of Spanish through the administration of the Fountas & Pinnell benchmark assessment, which is given in both Spanish and English. It is carried out three to four times a year. This assessment provides the school with key data points from which to garner information about students’ reading fluency, their ability to decode, and comprehension. Results are posted in our Google domain, which allows for teachers and administrators alike to make decisions around instructional next steps, as well as curricular changes based on ever-changing students’ needs. In addition, students are provided extensive opportunities to access information in their home language via books, software, internet resources, and interactions with community leaders. Our DL classroom libraries feature a large number of varying levels of texts in the students’ home language. The libraries are consistently growing due to grants, fundraisers, and yearly purchase orders through the school budget. Thanks to efficient use of software programs such as Meraki, new web based applications in students’ home language (such as Epic, ST Math, etc.) are distributed for use to all of our school’s technology including , macbooks, ipads, chromebooks, etc. It is also common for classes to have home language speakers from the neighborhood, as well as from outside businesses, to come and speak with the students in their classes and serve as a source of inspiration. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. a. We do not have any SIFE student this year, but if we did, SIFE students in our Dual Language or ENL programs would be supported by preparing for their specific needs on a near daily basis. Emergent reading materials in Spanish have been prepared for SIFE students in our third, fourth, and fifth grades. During the literacy block, SIFE students would read in Spanish even on English days in order to support their acquisition of basic grapho-phonic knowledge and beginning sight words. Guided reading would be the primary means of delivering instruction to these students. “Study-buddy” structures would support SIFE students when the teacher is instructing other groups. In addition, measures are taken such that newly arrived SIFE students work with lower grade classes during their “Fundations” lessons, a phonics program that stresses letter-sound recognition. This phonics program works well with any and all SIFE students and/or newcomers to our building, regardless of their home language. Lastly, as much as possible, SIFE students are pulled by qualified ENL instructors and/or other service providers, including a guidance counselor to work in small groups to not only address language acquisition, but also to address socio-emotional needs that can be commonly found in students new to the school system and/or country. b. Newcomers are seen by our ENL instructors in small groups using a stand alone or integrated model. Our newcomers are also served by their classroom teacher with the support of the bilingual resource room teacher. Our literacy curriculum, Ready Gen, helps newcomers build comprehension skills and strategies. The newcomer students also engage in daily journal writing (with and without writing prompts), which is in addition to the already existing Ready Gen writing component. Similar to the abovementioned SIFE students, newcomers are also pulled by qualified ENL teachers/service providers/guidance counselors to work in small groups to address any socio-emtional needs that may appear. c. Developing students receive intervention services in small groups from the classroom teacher. Language modalities are targeted through explicit instructional strategies to build vocabulary and syntactical skills. Teachers have been trained in appropriate frontloading of lessons to prepare children for the linguistic demands of the text. In addition, in-class interventions (Tier I and Tier II) include Reader’s Theater and daily poetry reading to support fluency and automaticity. They are also seen by ENL teachers as per CR Part 154. d. We do not have any long term ELLs, but if we did, we would provide explicit instruction in creating appropriate grade-level writing in different genres including expository, narrative, and opinion-based. Teachers would provide students with genre-specific rubrics to assist them in focusing on a particular content area. Small group instruction and stations during literacy and math workshop periods would also be a point of focus where teachers and service providers alike could hone in on specific skills and student needs. e. Our former ELLs receive ENL services and supports for two years after testing at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 CEP 50  These students are also granted the exact same testing modifications as all ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our teachers of ELL-SWDs use as many tools at their disposal as possible to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. Pairing numerous service providers, such as qualified ENL instructors, SpEd service providers, and our Columbia Presbyterian social worker with the ELL-SWD students, our aim to is meet their academic, linguistic, and socio-emotional needs as best we can. Employing new software programs such as EPIC, myOn, and ST Math, we are meeting students at their academic level and helping them achieve their goals alongside their GenEd grade level student counterparts. Our ELL-SWDs are using grade level curricular materials (ReadyGen for literacy and GoMath for mathematics) at the same pace as their GenEd grade level counterparts, but using differentiated instruction and ENL/SWD strategies to provide scaffolding where it is needed by the students. Other instructional strategies that are proving productive and successful include small group instruction (after the whole class mini-lesson), workshop stations and centers during whole class independent work time, and exit tickets and frequent “check-ins” for understanding. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs with special needs are served in accordance with the mandates governed by their IEP. The students placed in mono-lingual ICT classes and self-contained SpEd classes are serviced by standalone ENL teachers, as well as our bilingual SpEd service provider. Those SWDs in Dual Language classes are seen by our bilingual resource room teacher, our bilingual speech teacher, bilingual social worker, bilingual psychologist, and bilingual guidance counselor. We also have students receiving occupational therapy and physical therapy across the program models. Some of our ELL students require one to one health paraprofessionals, who are all bilingual. Additionally, we have a PPC team that meets every Thursday to discuss our SWDs, both currently working off of IEPs, as well as those students who are being referred for evaluations and could become future SWDs. This team is comprised of Administrators, Guidance Counselors, SpEd Coordinator, ELL Lead teacher, Social Workers and our School Psychologist. Wherever possible, we aim to accommodate our ELL-SWDs with as much early intervention as possible. Additionally, this year we have employed three highly qualified F status pedagogues to work with ELL-SWDs, and they have the flexibility to tailor their schedules around the specific academic needs of the students and the needs of the classroom teachers that work and plan lessons with. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In literacy, mathematics, science, and social studies, classroom teachers work with ELLs in small groups. In addition, stand alone ENL teachers support content instruction when they work with students in accordance with their weekly service schedules. Our school provides support services as follows: bilingual SETSS, Fundations double dose in English, and three F status AIS teachers who use ENL strategies in guided reading and guided math groups. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Based on recent data, our school has made several remarkable improvements for this school year. We have a purchased a new literacy software program entitled myOn, which offers reading materials at a wide variety of levels available in both English and Spanish. Each reading passage is coupled with a corresponding standards based online assessment that provides immediate feedback and results broken down by standard that will greatly influence further lesson plans. This year we are also employing three F status pedagogues who work directly with ELLs and ELL-SWDs in small group instruction, both in literacy and mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 51  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents in the community continued to express interest in a dual language program, as compared to a traditional transitional bilingual program model. After several years of increased parent interest, our school made the decision to switch to a dual language program. Teachers with bilingual licenses also express interest in educating their students from a dual language model as well, noting the advantages of promoting long term longitudinal growth in two languages (English and Spanish). Finally, after reviewing case studies and recent journal articles pointing to the merits of the dual language instructional model, our cabinet, along with the support of the teaching staff, made the decision to move away from transitional bilingual and toward dual language instruction. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All information regarding programs is provided bilingually to all parents. ELLs participate in each and every activity that any other student does at PS 48. Our after school Title-3 program primarily serves those ELLs who have not sufficient or consistent gains on the NSYESLAT in grades three through five. Title-3 meets twice a week for one hour and thirty minutes each day. ELLs are also offered seats in our school’s Saturday academy, which meets twice a month for three hours each day, and focuses instruction on literacy and mathematics skills building, both in English and Spanish. There also after-school clubs such as chess and yearbook that meet on a frequent basis, both of which are open to all students, including ELLs and ELL-SWDs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? All classrooms are outfitted with either smartboards or promethean boards, which help the teachers plan lessons, access the internet and utilize relevant apps across the content areas. Students also have access to ipads and chromebooks, which they use throughout the day. In addition, fluency and vocabulary building is supported through Readers Theater in both English and Spanish. The Dual Language program has a dedicated grade level reading curriculum from ReadyGen, as well as a library of scaffolded guided reading books from Anastacio & Associates. Anastacio has also provided us with NYSESLAT test prep materials for our ELL students from grades K-5. Science and Social Studies books have been purchased that have high contextual support through visuals, graphic organizers and explicit scaffolding for vocabulary. These materials and technology are implemented specifically with access to all students in mind, notably SIFE students and ELLs with disabilities. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In the Dual Language program, native language is used 50% of the time. Newly arrived students and SIFE students receive foundational literacy support in their native language. All classroom libraries include native language selections. ESL classes provide native language support through turn and talks, songs, poems, and attention to problem areas for Spanish speaking ELLs, such as letter sounds j, h, ch, etc. Many of our teachers speak Spanish and refer to cognates to help children build 2018-19 CEP 52  vocabulary. We have a small but ever-growing number of children who speak other languages including Arabic, French, and Chinese/Mandarin. Teachers make every attempt to have materials about children’s countries of origin in their classroom. When possible and applicable, we have been able to pair Arabic students so they can support each other in their native language. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Upon entrance into our school, students are appropriately placed and served according to their age and grade level. In the past, it has been challenging to provide age appropriate materials to SIFE students, but new technology and more specifically new web-based apps are continuously being developed and helping us more proficiently reach those students. Most recently, we have successfully utilized many of our new ELL-centered guided reading libraries recently acquired from Anastacio & Associates to help meet students at their individual levels. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We do not share a building and we are not co-located, but if we did, we would make sure to plan and schedule all of their students’ needs into the same programs and procedures as our own. We would also gladly lend any resources, materials, supplies and staff that would aid in this shared effort toward successfully educating any and all students who enter our doors each morning. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the summer, as well as throughout the school year, the Parent Coordinator, often alongside the ELL Coordinator and the School Counselor, offer tours to new students and parents alike who are interested in enrolling in our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 53  Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, a. All of our self-contained dual language classes provide instruction 50% in English and 50% in Spanish. However, any SIFE newcomers placed in dual language classes receive literacy in small groups in their home language whenever possible. New web-based literacy and math apps are also being implemented whenever possible. b. Since all K-5 dual language classes are self-contained and 50/50 models, all core content areas are taught in both languages (English and Spanish). Therefore, the dual language calendar determines the language of instruction on any given day. Our current model calls for one day in English, the next day in Spanish, so on and so forth, with each new day building upon course material taught the previous day. In mathematics, ELL students are offered the opportunity to select their preferred language for assessments, since each exam or assessment is offered in both English and Spanish. c. Due in part to our program model of 50/50 self-contained, neither language is separated for instruction. Rather, our teachers instruct both their EPs and ELLs in all core content areas in the language of the day all day long, be it English or Spanish. The following day instruction will be in the language not spoken the previous day. That way, all core content areas are not separated by language, but instead, instruction is provided every other day in either English or Spanish, always in accordance with the dual language calendar. d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously with differentiated expectations according to language dominance. , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. 2. 3. 4. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 5. 6. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 54  7. 8. 9. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances 2018-19 CEP 56  School Name: All ENL stand alone and integrated ENL teachers, as well as all Dual Language teachers, are offered numerous and varied ENL PD opportunities throughout the year. These same PDs are offered to, and attended by, non-pedagogic staff as well. This year, PD is specifically targeted to support teachers of ELLs as they unpack and implement their newly revised and updated ReadyGen literacy curriculum, in addition to their recently updated and revised GoMath curriculum. Specific PDs targeted teachers with ELLs, ELL-SWDs, and also SIFE students, and how teachers can realistically reach these students for small group instruction. These PDs will be lead by the literacy coach, the math coach, the ELL lead teacher, and an Assistant Principal. These PDs are all rooted in supporting ELLs as they engage with the CCLS, and therefore all resources, materials, and instructional development provided were developed with that in mind. They take place most often every Monday afternoon, from 2:25pm until 3:45pm. In addition, our ELL Lead teacher will attend bi-monthly workshops on various topics including, but not limited to: understanding state and city ELL compliance issues, understanding and writing the Title-3 plan, mentoring and supporting ESL/Dual Language teachers of ELLS, and preparing for NYSESLAT administration and test prep. This information will be then turn-keyed to teachers of ELLs, on a regular basis, often during our school’s weekly professional development minutes on Monday and Tuesday afternoons, or during monthly swing period meetings, which take on Monday mornings during first and second period, from 8:50am 10:22am. School DBN: The PS 48 Cabinet Committee determines the professional development that the school will be providing to the staff. Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators to address the needs of ELLs. These PDs take place every Monday and/or Tuesday afternoon during our mandated minutes of professional development (80 minutes on Monday and 75 minutes on Tuesday). 15% of this PD for all teachers is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For all bilingual and ENL teachers, 50% of the PD hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with Common Core Language Standards, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating linguistic goals and content instruction. Records are kept in our Teacher Center in a centrally located binder, and copies of agendas and sign-in sheets opportunity. Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. development professional each and available 9:36am are on hand and every after to and 9:37am to Title Signature Principal Name (PRINT) PS 48 provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during our weekly Parent Engagement Time, which takes place every Tuesday afternoon, from 2:22pm until 3:40pm. Teachers meet with individual parents/guardians to discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, and also the most recent language proficiency results. Teachers keep written records of each parent meeting, highlighting such details as: when and where the meeting took place, the duration of the meeting, and whether it took place in person, by phone, or by e-mail or letter. All of these details are up to the decided discretion of the parents, made in advance of each scheduled meeting. If a phone conversation is held, translation services are always available. Follow up Date (mm/dd/yy) Throughout the school year, there are many and varied school-related activities that involve both ELLs and parents of ELLs. Parent events include, but are not limited to: Parent Orientation, School tours, Open School night, various family movie nights, evening holiday celebrations, Family Arts & Crafts night, parent-teacher conferences and culminating end-of-year celebrations and graduations. There are also parent-centered events associated with the after school Title-3 program, such as Readers Theater performances put on by the students. Because of our mostly bilingual staff, all of our parent-centered activities are offered in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual Parent Coordinator also provides workshops for 2018-19 CEP 57  e-mails, phone calls, or class dojo communications are also maintained and available either online via class dojo, or in the teachers written records. NA Assistant Principal PO Michael J. Buczek Parent Coordinator Tracy Walsh ENL/Bilingual Teacher Zoraida Hernandez Parent Arlene Tavarez Teacher/Subject Area Antonio Melendez Teacher/Subject Area Erneticia Concepcion Tayna Austrie Coach Coach parents in both English and Spanish. Whenever possible, for the students whose parents or guardians do not speak English or Spanish, translation services are utilized to send home written invites in their home language. Also, at drop-off in the morning and during dismissal in the afternoon, siblings or other family members of school students are engaged to help with translation services. Topics for this year’s parental involvement include, but are not limited to: parenting skills, health and nutrition, English survival schools, and transitioning students to middle school. Other binlingual workshops offered include cake and cookie and pastelito baking classes, pottery classes, and interior design classes. The PA (Parents Association) works in close collaboration with teachers and administration, volunteers in classrooms and on field trips, and at all school events, such as fundraisers like “movie night” and “bake sales”. Tracy Walsh 06M048 11/30/17 11/30/17 11/30/17 11/30/17 11/30/17 11/30/17 2018-19 CEP 58  Tabitha Lopez School Counselor Kayla McCormack Jamie Leffert 11/30/17 Alice Cohen Jonathan Hogan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 11/30/17 Other Manuel Ramirez Other - Other - 11/30/17 11/30/17 Rosario Saldana 11/30/17 11/30/17 11/30/17 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 048 School Name: P.O. Michael J Buczek Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Written translation and oral interpretation needs for our school are assessed using data that is collected from the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), which is completed upon a child’s admission to a New York City public school; parents’ biographical information provided in students’ cumulative record folders and on students’ emergency cards; and feedback offered by parents at Parent Association meetings and during parent workshops. This information is analyzed and we use the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) to determine which languages school documents and announcements must be translated into to ensure that all parents are provided with information in the language they can understand. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, Arabic, French, and Mandarin. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents that are distributed thoughtout the school year to our families are translated. This includes: parent bulletins, calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, testing dates, and all parent notices. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Face-to-face meeting with parents that occur thoughtout the school year include: parent-teacher conferences, IEP meetings, parent information sessions, registration, holiday events, meetings with guidance councelor, meetings with interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 61  parent coordinator, meetings with the ELL coordinator, meetings with teachers, meeting with assistant principal, and meetings with the principal. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 48M will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by translating and interpreting all forms of parent notifications from English to Spanish. There are always translators availabe for our parents during all school activities and information sessions about their children's acedemic performance. We also have a sign posted at the primary entrance, by the security desk, in the main office, and at the ELL and Parent Coordinator's offices indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services. We will also continue to use all resources available from The Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator conducts a survey to gather feedback from parents. She also has direct communication with parents through the Remind program where parents can message her any concerns and they will be immediately addressed. 2018-19 CEP 62 
