2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M063 School Name: THE STAR ACADEMY – P.S.63 Principal: DARLENE CAMERON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information STAR Academy 310100010063 Pre-K-5 th Grade School Number (DBN): 01M063 121 East 3 rd Street New York, NY 10009 212-674-3180 212-420-9018 Phone Number: Fax: Darlene Cameron Dcameron2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Darlene Cameron Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 1 Superintendent’s Office Address: Lauren Blumenthal Esther Melo Mimi Stein None None None District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street Room 136 NY, NY 10002 CChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Manhattan Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue 8 th Floor NY, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Email Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 646-470-0721 Fax: 212-356-7546 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Darlene Cameron Lauren Blumenthal Esther Melo Mimi Stein Carly Warren Melissa Lopez Suzanne Farkas SimonaJansons Esther Melo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nicole Monteleone Kevin Kelliher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At STAR Academy, teachers, parents, students and service providers work together in a collaborative community to encourage students to become life-long learners and active citizens. This is supportive to our mission as we strive to empower our families to be proactive participants in the STAR community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 63, The Star Academy, stands for Students Taking Active Roles. We believe that children as young as four should be active participants in their education and school-wide community. Our programming and extracurricular activities reflect this philosophy, which we believe will encourage students to become life-long learners and active citizens. We realize that all students learn differently and it is our job to build on their strengths and determine how to best reach each student. STAR Academy- PS 63 does this by: ● Placing emphasis on literacy, mathematics, and technology. ● Expecting and supporting high academic achievement for all students. ● Maintaining a safe, secure, and warm learning environment. ● Developing a community of learners who value themselves and the diversity of others. ● Provide a rich, well-rounded curriculum, which includes the arts, physical education, field trips and a variety of after school programs. ● Promoting the social development of our students through a character education curriculum, conflict resolution, and school assemblies. ● Encouraging parental involvement through frequent communication and participation in the PTA, school events and meetings. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At Star Academy PS 63, 32% of our students have special needs. Some of these special needs include a Speech and Language Impairment, Learning Disabilities, Autism, Hearing Impairment, and Emotional Disturbance. Teachers constantly collaborate with the support staff in order to create a program that will best fit the needs of these students as well as build on their strengths. Behavior and academic checklists are created as well as small groups, modified criteria, and individual assignments. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, PS 63 made the most progress in developing and implementing rigorous instruction, especially in mathematics, and creating a supportive environment. Teachers have attended many professional developments to help increase the rigor in all subject areas. This past year, we were also a Showcase School for our math practices. Our key area of focus for the 2017-2018 school year is to work on trust between teachers, administration, students and staff. Although this has significantly improved this year, our school believes trust is key in a successful school environment. We have implemented a character education program that we hope will continue to build a strong community between all staff, students, administration, and parents. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M063 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 203 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 73.9% % Reduced Lunch 1.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 63.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.12 5% 35% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 64 92.3% 5.9% 33.0% 18.2% 3.0% 3.9% 2 10% 5.9 57.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students performing at a level 1: 2014-2015: 31.4% 2015-2016: 42% 2016-2017: 34% 2017-2018: 39% Our goal for 2018-2019 is to decrease the number of students performing at a level 1 by assessing the Independent Reading Assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students performing at Level 1 will decrease by 10%, from 39% to 29% of tested students as evidenced by the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) in grades K-2 and In the Book Running Records for grades 3-5. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Nov/December: During staff-wide Professional Development, teachers will use 2018 New York State (English Language Arts (ELA) testing item analysis and 2017-2018 ELA Proficiency levels to identify school-wide areas of need and work in heterogeneous grade clusters to identify the top 3 standards to focus on for ELA school-wide. Grade teams use the top 3 standards to create whole class and small group learning experiences in their classroom that target the areas of need, including pre- and post-assessments. Grades 3-5 will use school-wide ELA areas of need standards to align with Teachers College pre- and post- assessments for Reading units. Teachers will provide ELA workshops for parents on all grade levels. Once a student in any grade reaches a level L, student will be assessed on an in the book Running Record. Teachers will meet with parents to explain the new assessment (Independent Reading Assessment). January/March: Lower grades will use reading assessment templates from grades 3-5 to create reading assessments to assess targeted ELA school-wide goals Grades 3-5 will group students based on data from reading/writing assessments and provide instruction to zoom in on moving students from 1->2, 2->3, 3->4. Students will be regrouped every two weeks based on formative assessments. Teachers will provide ELA workshops for parents on all grade levels. All Students Grades K-5 November/December 2018 All Staff January/March 2019 All Staff All Students Grades K-5 2018-19 CEP 13  April-June 2019 Final Assessments will be reviewed by staff and teachers will norm on responses Students will be given final assessments and grades will be entered into a tracker, giving a percentage of students and sharing their performance with staff. All Students Grades K-5 April/June 2019 All Staff Ongoing All Staff All Students Grades K-5 Ongoing: Host parent workshops around the CCLS to support the child’s work at home Classroom teachers will plan for small group work based on assessment/data (running records, Teacher’s College performance tasks) for all students. Teachers will uAll Students Grades K-5 use running records to identify strengths and areas of growth from September 2018-June 2019. Reassess students and regroup students for AIS with flexible grouping. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Once a student in any grade reaches a level K, student will be assessed on an in the book Running Record. Teachers will meet with parents to explain the new assessment (Independent Reading Assessment). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Fundations and Leveled Literacy Programs - 4 times per week 2. Teachers College Reading Continuum, focusing on reading comprehension and fluency. - as needed 3. Meeting with Teachers College Staff Developer or administration - 1 per month 4. Meeting with parents - 1 per month Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the number of students performing at Level 1 will decrease to 34% of tested students as evidenced by the Teachers College Running Records and Independent Reading Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher's College Running Records (K-2) and Independent Reading Assessment (3-5) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive Environment Scores: Classroom Behavior 2015-2016: 90% 2016-2017: 69% 2017-2018: 60% 2017-2018 District wide percentage: 73% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, STAR Academy will increase our supportive environment score by 10%, from 60% to 70% as evidenced by the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers received a Special Education Toolkit which has supports for all students to use within the classroom environment. Teachers Sept 2018 Classroom teachers, Administrators, Service Providers  Parent/Teacher conferences - Check in with parents via survey surrounding supportive environment.  Tuesday Parent Engagement time - Launch of parent workshops  Parents receive weekly Competent Kids Caring Community (CKCC) newsletters/active home engagement  Tuesday Parent Engagement time - parent workshops  Parents receive weekly CKCC newsletters/active home  engagement Schoolwide Curriculum Night to inform families of progress.  Parent/Teacher conferences - Check in with parents via survey surrounding supportive environment.  Tuesday Parent Engagement time - parent workshops  Parents receive weekly CKCC newsletters/active home engagement  Tuesday Parent Engagement time/morning time before school - parent workshops  Parents receive weekly CKCC newsletters/active home engagement  CKCC student self-assessment and teacher assessment Parents Nov/Dec 2018 Classroom teachers/ Administration Parents Jan/Feb 2019 Classroom teachers/ Administration Parents Mar/Apr 2019 Classroom teachers/ Administration May/June 2019 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Teachers will discuss with parents the implications of positive classroom behavior during curriculum night and parent/teacher conferences. -Parents will be invited to CKCC mornings to share the social/emotional practices that are in the classroom. -Parents will be encouraged to complete the home/school connection CKCC page with their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The CKCC program will aid students with the social/emotional piece. Monday professional development for teachers. Half day professional development for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, STAR Academy will increase our supportive environment score by 5%, as evidenced by the School Leadership Team Parent Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A mid-year survey will be sent to staff in order to determine if the goal is being met. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Addition and Subtraction Math Problem Type Data: Students performing at a level 1: 2015-2016: 30% of students 2016-2017: 25% of students 2017-2018: 9% of students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students performing at Level 1 on addition and subtraction problem types will decrease by 9%, from 91% to 100% of tested students, as evidenced by the Problem Type Assessment developed on site. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Our teacher teams normed math through vertical planning and launched an initiative to create effective small group math instruction within the Math Progressions and Math Fluency.  Teacher teams give a problem type and fluency baseline assessment and analyzed the data during common planning.  Our teacher teams have created a scope and sequence for the year for each grade that includes the standards and big ideas in each unit, they have updated it based on current student data.  Teacher teams analyze the problem type assessment based on conceptual and procedural errors during grade level common planning.  Based on summative and formative data, teachers will collaborate with each other to develop school wide instruction based on strengths and needs as well as revise past units to reflect current student data. Teachers will make purposeful flexible groupings based on the data during teacher professional development work time.  Teacher teams will use the misconception tool kit to address misconceptions within their differentiated groups and daily lesson plans.  Teacher teams analyze the fluency assessment and place students in flexible groups within their classrooms based on the data.  Grades 3-5 used the Common Core learning Standards (CCLS) Focus standard document to revisit pacing and standards alignment.  New teacher mentor will support new teachers on the Math Continuum and lesson planning using Concrete/Pictorial/Verbal/Abstract (CPVA) strategies.  Grade teams will analyze the math test results and zoom in on 3 standards each grade struggled with the most.  Teacher teams will read sections of “Mathematicians at Work” to help build conceptual understanding for the CCLS content area. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 Teachers Sept 2018-Oct 2018 Teachers K-5 Teachers Nov 2018-Dec 2018 Grade teams 2018-19 CEP 20 K-5 Teachers Jan 2019-Feb 2019 Teachers K-5 Teachers and Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers  Items analysis will be used to zoom in on what misconceptions students had during common planning.  All grade teams will work to revise past units and upcoming units to plan strategically for those items, including adding to misconceptions in unit and lesson plans. .  Upper grades will work together to create differentiated problem type groups across grade-levels for two days a week of instruction. Lower grades will continue to create problem type differentiated groups. Fluency data will be updated and new groupings created by teacher teams. School-wide data meeting will take place and next steps will be created for students who are struggling to make progress or above-grade level outliers.     Formative assessments of math lessons will be used throughout the unit to reconfigure groupings and inform planning.  Teacher teams will analyze student work using the strategy continuum to analyze student strengths and next steps. (ie Manipulatives, pictures, number lines)  Common planning will include a student work protocol to plan next steps for students who have not moved.  Data meeting will take place and teachers will revisit their plans and small groups based on the data next steps.  Teacher teams analyze the fluency assessment and place students in flexible groups within their classrooms based on the data  Math workshops will be held for parents in order for  them to help assist their child at home. Star Academy is a showcase school, and teachers will use CPVA in their lessons, to teach the students where they are at and push them to the next level. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be provided for parents to teach them our way of instructing students. Videos will be posted for parents with examples of how to solve different types of Math Problems. Parents will be invited into the classroom during work time, where they will learn, along with the students, the different strategies that students use to solve Math problems. Star Academy will have a school wide "Math Morning," where parents will learn the fluency and problem solving games that students play within the classroom to build on their knowledge of grade level Math. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Classroom teachers will use the resources such as Engage NY, Do the Math by Marilyn Burns and Context for Learning to plan units and lessons. 2. Morning intervention AIS period was shifted to support both mathematics and literacy instruction. 3. School schedule has been adjusted to support small group instruction in Math and Math fluency standards. Professional development has been provided to teachers on an ongoing basis to support Math instruction in the classroom. 4. Teachers will go to Showcase School Professional Development, in order to further understand the student "math mind." They will use the term "Thinking Like a Mathematician" as they implement the strategies learned in showcase. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the number of students performing at Level 1 on addition and subtraction Math problem types will decrease by 5%, from 91% to 96% of tested students as evidenced by school developed Performance Tasks, based on grade level standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 mid-year data includes Kindergarten - 5th Grade Addition and Subtraction Problem Type Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Danielson Framework's Advanced Evaluation System Report Percentages: Percentage of teachers with developing ratings in domain 3b and 3c: 2015-2016: 27% 2016-2017: 49% 2017-2018: 50% In domain 3b, 65% of teachers had a developing rating, whereas in domain 3c, 35% of teachers had a developing rating. Therefore, the average of the two percentages is a 50% developing rating. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a decrease of teachers performing at a developing rating within Domain 3B (Questioning and Discussion) and 3C (Engaging Students in Learning) of Danielson's Advanced Evaluation System from 50% to 40%. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -IPC planning meetings will be based on domain 3 Teachers Sept 2018 Teachers/ -Teachers will create goals based on domain 3. Teachers Sept 2018 Teachers/ Administration Administration Teachers/ Administration Teachers/ Administration Administration October/ November 2018 December 2018 to Feb 2019 Sept. 2019-June 2019 -Teachers will do intervisitations with teachers rated effective or highly effective in this area. Teachers -Principal and Assistant Principal will meet with teachers to track progress and create next steps Teachers -Additional professional development will be provided focused on remediation based on small groups and one on one conferencing. Teachers -February checkpoint: At professional developments and debriefs from observations, teachers will assess their current scores in this domain and create mid year goals to increase their score by one rating higher by June. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Parents will be sent home with different ways to engage their students when performing academic tasks. -Parents will meet with teachers to review the ways to engage students and model how to use different types of talking to each other in academic tasks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  Danielson Framework Danielson Professional Development Pre and Post Observation Conferences Schoolwide intervisitations with teachers rated effective or highly effective in these areas Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase of effective or highly effective teachers ratings in domains 3B and 3C of Danielson's advanced evaluation system as evidenced by the measures of teacher practice evaluation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Danielson Observations -Teacher IPC meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Percentage of families attending attending a before or after school event: 2015-2016: 60% 2016-2017: 72% 2017-2018: over 85% Since the goal has been met for the past 3 years, we have revised the goal to include parents who attend two or more family events. Percentage of families attending two or more before or after school event (2017-2018): 67% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 77% of families at STAR Academy will attend at least two or more before or after school family events. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly emails will be sent from the school advertising upcoming events Monthly newsletters will be posted in the lobby inviting parents to events School messenger will be sent out advertising events Pre-k-5 parents Pre-k-5 parents Pre-k-5 parents Family events will be given at different times of day (EX: in the morning for CKCC-Competent Kids Caring Community) Pre-k-5 parents One night per month workshops will be held on topics based on parent survey. Pre-k-5 parents Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Teachers/administration Teachers Teachers/administration Teachers Teachers February check point: 1-2 family events will be offered in the morning after drop off in order to accommodate times for multiple families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. -We will work with University Settlement, our after school program, to make sure that notices are sent out verbally and written for all events in our partnership. -Family event fliers will be translated into multiple languages, as needed -Times of events will be before or after school, as determined by the needs of the parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Schedule adjustments to offer event at various times of day 2018-19 CEP 27  -A wide of range of topics/activities offered to meet different interests -Incorporate parent ideas into activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 72% parents will have attended one family event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets cross referenced with class lists. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations Upper Grade Level Specific AIS(Academic Intervention Services) Groups Math Stations focused on solving problem types. Implementation of Showcase practices in daily lessons Shared Reading Shared Writing Interactive Writing Repeated Reading Shared Reading Shared Writing Interactive Writing Repeated Reading 1-Guidance 2- Competent Kids Caring Communities (CKCC) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students were given a letter/sound recognition test and split into Fundations groups according to the data. Students reading at a Level L or higher were put into an LLI guided reading program Students were given a formative assessment focused on word problems. Based on the data, students were split into small groups between different teachers to target individual needs. Students are split into parallel and small groups throughout the day Students are split into parallel and small groups throughout the day 1-ELA based on Running Records and Sight Word Assessment 2- Social skills building, relational aggression, cooperative play, verbalization of feelings, self-Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day (every morning) Small group During the school day, 2 days/week Small group During the school day Small group During the school day 1-Small group 2a-Small group or one on one 2b-Whole class 1-During the school day 2a-During the school day 2b-Once a week, during a set time each class will teach a lesson around social skills 2018-19 CEP 29  regulation of feelings of frustration/rage, depression 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 19.4% 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Free and reduced lunch, bus option available Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31 Free and reduced lunch, bus option available 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment -Job posting on Teacher's College Site -Attending Department of Education recruitment conference -Hiring committee works from April-August -New Teacher professional development offered over the summer. Retention -Offer extensive professional development to all staff -Open door policy with administration -Teacher input in professional development -Teacher leaders are given additional assignments outside of the classroom. -Active United Federation of Teachers Consultation Committee -Showcase School Participation (Second Year) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) professional development through Administrators and outside resources. - Administrators assist teachers with on-going data assessments via data meetings. - Teacher teams will examine student work from the previous school year to understand gaps in student knowledge or skill and inform the revision of their instructional units - Teacher teams will refine curriculum units and engage in a structured protocol to ensure alignment with the selected Common Core standards, as well as, analysis of student data - Teachers will collaboratively assess the quality of student work that comes out of the implementation of units, and develop a cycle of analyzing student work, and adjusting instruction to ensure consistent student progress. - Teachers will periodically review the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and make sure it aligns with their lessons plans and unit plans. - Monday professional development, led alternately by teachers and administration, whom have been to an off site professional development. Teachers will turnkey the professional development section. 2018-19 CEP 33  Teacher mentoring program. - New teacher center mentor. - On Chancellor’s Conference Days, PD Half Days, and Inquiry Extended Day sessions, professional development sessions will be held to help teachers deeply understand the requirements of being a highly effective teacher. - Professional development provided by Teachers College reading and writing program - Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) professional development through Administrators and outside resources. - Teacher teams will participate in Common Planning Periods weekly with support of Administrators - Showcase School Participation and Professional Development Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). -Kindergarten orientation -Pass up records -Turning 5 meetings -IEP meetings -Transition plans -Weekly school tours -Meetings with parent coordinator -Competent Kids Caring Communities (CKCC) program 2018-19 CEP 34  -Pre-K social worker for district 1 visits monthly to support individual families with the transition to elementary school. -Pre-K social worker and IEP team support teachers with professional development to support students and families transitioning to elementary school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. -Teachers met as a staff to select Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) during Monday professional development time. -MOSL committee meets three times per year. -Teachers are going to use items analysis to choose school wide goals. - Teachers will use items analysis data to select school wide instructional goals and create developmentally appropriate assessments as grade level teams. -Teachers complete a survey to select professional development preferences. -Teachers plan book club professional developments to turnkey to staff. -Teachers turnkey off site professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 98,999.00 38,906.00 0 0 1,466,471.00 x x N/A N/A x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 CEP 35 Column B Section Reference(s) See action plan 5A, 5B, 5C See action plan 5A, 5B, 5C N/A N/A See action plan 5A, 5B, 5C  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 36   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Star Academy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Star Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 38  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Star Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name The STAR Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 063 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Darlene Cameron Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Martin Perl Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Stein, Special Educati Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Ashley Feldman Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Jodi Friedman Coach type here School Counselor Parent Esther Melo Parent Coordinator Alice Saavedra Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 43  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 181 Total number of ELLs 2 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.10% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school participates in the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, and TCRWP is used in grades Kindergarten- 5th as one of the assessment tools in the school to access early literacy skills. We use on Demand Writing Assessments and TC Running Records to assess student reading and writing needs. Additionally, the school uses Performance Series Periodic Assessments and teacher created assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data is analyzed from on Demand Writing and Teachers College Running Records. Also, rubrics are used for scoring ELA Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) for Beginning of Year and End of Year assessments. These assessments provide additional data regarding English language learners, and their language acquisition strengths and weaknesses. 2018-19 CEP 44  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSESLAT, the New York State Tests in English Language Arts, Math and Grade 4 Science, and the assessments we use for all students TCRWP, Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) Baseline Assessments and End of Year Assessments, and Periodic Assessments). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We evaluate the success of our programs by results of NYSESLAT, the New York State Tests in English Language Arts, Math and Grade 4 Science, and the assessments we use for all students TCRWP, MOSL Baseline Assessments and End of Year Assessments, Periodic Assessments. Additionally, we measure student success by informal assessments, observing students in their classrooms, and their basic interpersonal communication skills, and adaptation in the classroom. We have the same high expectations of our English language learners, as the rest of our student population. We use data gathered from assessments to measure the growth of our students, and then use this data to make informed decisions regarding our instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom assessment data is used to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. Students who are flagged as at risk are given targeted instruction in their areas of need. Whole group, (tier 1) small group (tier 2), and individualized (tier 3) instruction is utilized. Their progress is monitored by the ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and PPT Team. These students receive one-to one tutoring by trained school volunteers, as well as participating in AIS and Extended Day instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use assessment data from the NYSESLAT, NY State ELA, Math Grade 3-5 and Grade 4 Science tests. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data findings are discussed at grade level common planning meetings, as well as school staff meetings. There is continuous monitoring of the literacy skills of our ELLs. This data provides teachers with insight into student reading comprehension, phonics, and decoding skills. Further analysis of data provides insight into their reading,writing, listening, and speaking skills. Teachers use this data to differentiate instruction for their students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are heterogeneously grouped according to grade level and language proficiency and are served per their mandated CR Part 154.2 hours using an integrated instructional model. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 45  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Per CR Part 154.2 Requirements, the ENL teacher uses the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to determine the number of instructional minutes mandated per student. Beginner/Entering ELLs (Total: 360 minutes) 180 minutes of stand alone and 180 minutes integrated of ENL/ELA. Low Intermediate/Emerging ELLs (Total: 360 minutes) 90 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA, or 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area. Intermediate/Transitioning ELLs (Total:180 minutes) 90 integrated ENL or 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area. Advanced/Expanding ELLs (Total: 180 minutes) 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area. Proficient/Commanding (Total: 90 minutes) 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Reading Workshop, Writing Workshop, Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science are all delivered in English by the ENL teacher. In order to ensure understanding and achievement by English Language Learners, the ENL teacher utilizes scaffolds to facilitate student understanding of content area vocabulary and concepts. All instruction is taught in English, with the aid of bilingual glossaries (when they are necessary). The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to provide appropriate ENL instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? English language learners who are native speakers of Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB within the first ten days of enrollment. Teacher created assessments are created throughout the school year to evaluate students in their home language. Whenever possible, translated versions of Period Assessments, and New York State tests, such as Math, and 4th Grade Science tests are administered to English language learners. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are provided with additional support based on the individual needs of the student. We have several trained volunteers that work one-to-one with students. In addition, we also have the help of the New York University students who take part in the America Reads program. b. Newcomers whom have in the US for less than three years receive the same Reading Workshop, Writing Workshop, and testing preparation as other students in their grade because they are required to take the math and science tests. The newcomers are constantly observed and conference notes are kept on each individual student and reviewed by the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher. Developing ELL students qualify for and are included in daily school-wide small group instruction. c. Developing students are provided with small guided reading and writing instruction, as well as partner work. d. After students have received ELL services for 4 to 6 years, extensive academic intervention is provided. Although we have no Long-Term ELLs. In the past, services provided to long-term ELLs fall into a similar category as Services provided for Students with Interrupted Formal Education. We provide additional support based on the needs of the student. For example, we have an extended day program; seek individual tutors and peer-tutors to help with the long-term ELLs. These students are also part of the academic intervention programs for identified at risk students. e. Former ELLs (Commanding on the NYSESLAT) receive 90 minutes weekly for two years after passing the NYSESLAT. These students benefit from scaffolding in writing and content area subjects. 2018-19 CEP 46  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL Teacher, classroom teachers, as well as members of the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) meet to discuss the unique needs of English language learners, who also might have special academic/emotional disabilities that might impact their English language acquisition. Accordingly, service providers such as the Speech teacher, give their expert knowledge as how to best provide individually tailored instruction for these students. ELLs with disabilities might receive instruction by means by means of parallel, alternative and station teaching models. In some cases, bilingual teacher assistants (paraprofessionals) provide additional support. Other strategies can include differentiated graphic organizers, and sentence frames to assist students in focusing. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the diverse needs of our English language learners with disabilities within the least restrictive environment. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers collaborate with instructional strategies, such as small group guided practice, and strategy group teaching aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher are flexible in scheduling common literacy periods to focus on specific needs of ELL-SWDs in order to achieve their Individual Education Plan (IEP) goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school offers a diverse range of intervention services. The Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) meets weekly to discuss the academic and emotional support that some students, including English language learners might require. ELLs in the lowest third of the school receive academic intervention services during school-wide AIS small group instruction in English. Differentiated lessons are also provided in Math, Social Studies and Science to help them achieve their academic goals. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Creating additional programs in the arts such as music and dance during the school day, as well as in the After School program, where English language learners can participate. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given the same access to all school programs. We are dedicated to providing an education that is rich, rigorous, and well rounded. Our students come from vastly diverse cultural backgrounds. Besides academics, ELL students are included in all enrichment activities. All students, including ELLs, participate in a Dance Program (Notes in Motion) in addition to Music, Art, and Physical Education classes. Students also go on field trips to museums, attend plays, and dance performances. The fifth grade students visit New York University in the fall, and also travel to visit Philadelphia, PA on an annual overnight bus trip in the spring. They also take part in a several week Script to Stage program. ELL students are given all supports necessary for them to participate in all activities. Many of the English language learners also attend the University Settlement After School program which is housed in the school building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL classroom has many leveled books, books on CDs, a Photo Library, Glossaries, Picture Dictionaries, as well as many other useful bilingual materials to help and engage ELLs at various levels. All students, including ELLs are given vacation and summer packets by their classroom teachers. English language learners have access to technology in the school, which 2018-19 CEP 47  includes classroom laptops, computers, and Smart Boards. The school library has many computers, foreign language books, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is given to English language learners in the ENL model in the following ways: ELLs are given the opportunity to work in small groups with either current ELLs and former ELLs. This is an opportunity to assess their content knowledge in their home language. Bilingual Teacher Assistants provide additional home language support, and assist in student home language assessment. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After careful review of NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, ELLs are provided with services and support by grade level and age. All Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week, and all Transitioning, and Expanding students receive 180 minutes total as per mandates of the CR Part 154.2. Students who are Commanding per their scores on the NYSESLAT receive 90 minutes of transitional ENL services for two years. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The STAR Academy, PS 63 shares the building with PS 363, The Neighborhood School. The schools share the resources of a common school library, gym, courtyard garden, and auditorium. Many ELLs from both schools participate in After School programs which are housed in the same building. There are opportunities throughout the school year when ELLs from both schools can attend movie nights, and other building-wide activities such as participating in projects in the common garden. The ENL teachers in both schools collaborate and share ENL classroom materials and technology. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New English language learners receive additional support before the beginning of the school year, and when admitted throughout the school year. The Parent Coordinator, who is bilingual in English and Spanish, ensures that parents are made of all the activities in the school which are available to them. New ELLs are partnered with a buddy in their class, or another class who might speak their home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered to any students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The entire school faculty, including the ENL teacher will continue to attend New York City Department of Education staff development, and other off-site trainings throughout the school year. The ENL teacher will continue to attend professional 2018-19 CEP 48  development workshops offered by organizations such as NYTESOL and TESOL, as well as workshops offered by the Division of English Language Learners (DELLS), the Manhattan Field Office, Teachers College, and RBERN. The entire staff attends weekly Professional Development training, and workshops on half-day Friday afternoons, which includes topics such as supporting of English language learners to succeed in the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school adheres to the requirements CR Part 154.2, 15% of total hours of ELL-specific PD for all teachers, and 50% total hours for ELL-specific PD for ENL teachers. These workshops provided by our District and Borough Field Support Center specifically focus on developing best practices for ELLs and Common Core Standards. Many of these workshops focus on delivering Common Core-aligned instruction and collaborating with classroom teachers to ensure academic success for all ELLs. Another important area of focus is content area instruction for ELLs. This school year the ENL teacher will be attending monthly English as a new language workshops provided by the Manhattan Field Support Office. This Professional Development is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content instruction, including a focus for best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Copies of Professional Development Agendas, and attendance sheets are kept on file in the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent-Teacher conferences, weekly parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons, Back to School events, the ENL teacher schedules annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs. The ENL Teacher contacts the parents of ELLs by telephone, and letters sent home. A follow-up call and/or letter is sent if the the parent cannot make a face to face meeting. When needed, the bilingual English/Spanish school parent coordinator is available, in addition to other bilingual staff members, or the services of the DOE translation unit is used. The ENL teacher keeps records of annual individual meetings, phone call logs, and letters with parents of ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 63 has an active PTA and School Leadership Team. Parents of ELLs and former ELLs are well integrated and are represented in all school activities and functions. For several years, PS 63 has provided, and continues to provide free English lessons for parents of our ELL students. Parents of English language learners have the opportunity to attend various educational workshops held throughout the school year, which include local agencies and organizations that can provide assistance to new immigrant families. PS 63 translates all notices to inform parents of these workshops and meetings. PTA meetings and workshops are also orally translated for parents when needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Darlene Cameron, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The STAR Academy School DBN: 01M063 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Darlene Cameron Title Principal Jodi Friedman Assistant Principal Alice Saavedra Parent Coordinator Martin Perl Esther Melo Melissa Stein/Grade 1 Special n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ashley Feldman Other Speech Teacher n/a n/a Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/10/17 10/10//17 10/10/17 10/10//17 10/10/17 10/10/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/10/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M063 School Name: The STAR Academy Superintendent: D. Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alice Saavedra Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the parent/guardian responses to the Pre-Kindergarten Home Language Identification Survey, and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to ascertain which language(s) the parents prefer to use when the school communicates with them. Parents indicate this at the bottom of the page in the HLIS part 3 Parent Information, as to what language they want to receive written and oral communication. This data is also reflected in ATS reports, and the blue emergency cards kept on file in the main office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 53  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred language (other than English) for both written and oral communication is: Spanish 12 6.52 13 7.07 Bengali Ukrainian English 1 4 167 0.54 2.17 90.76 1 4 165 0.54 2.17 89.67 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. With bilingual staff members. Our Pre-K and Kindergarten handbooks. These documents are available in several languages including Spanish, Bengali,and Chinese. Other documents include translations of the school handbook in Spanish. Families In the Fall, and throughout the school year as new students are registered.These documents are available in several languages including Spanish, Bengali,and Chinese. Other documents include translations of the school handbook in Spanish. These documents are provided to parents in September, and throughout the school year for incoming families. All parent-teacher conference announcements, which occur in November and March are sent to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary, at least two weeks in advance. The New York State testing dates, which take place in April and May, as well as letters from the school administration, etc. are translated when ever possible by bilingual staff in the school, or by the Translation and Interpretation Unit, two weeks ahead of time. 2018-19 CEP 54  Notification of Parent -Teacher conferences November, March With bilingual staff members. Parent-Engagement meetings Through-out the school year reminders With bilingual staff members. PTA meetings Through-out the school year. With bilingual staff members. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Throughout the school year. With bilingual staff members. interpretation service(s)? In addition to Parent-teacher conferences in November and March, the school also has Back to School night at the beginning of the school year in September, as well as a Moving-Up event at the end of the school year. Tuesday Parent Engagement is another opportunity for face-to-face meetings with parents. Annual ENL teacher and parent meetings. When deemed appropriate other school based personnel might make outreach calls to parents. Back to School Night September Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March Moving Up Event June With bilingual staff members. With bilingual staff members. With bilingual staff members. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School messenger messages are always in English and Spanish, Dojo and Google translation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is provided to all staff members along with other regulations at required staff meetings and PD meetings. They are signed for by staff members. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All New York City Department of Education materials which include documents, posters, and other materials which have been translated are posted and disseminated to parents if needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school takes the responses to the parent survey very seriously, and all effort is made to respond accordingly to parents' feedback. The LAP team addresses these matters, and discusses the parent feedback with the staff at school-wide meetings. 2018-19 CEP 56 
