2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M075 School Name: P.S. 075 EMILY DICKINSON Principal: GEORGE GEORGILAKIS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Emily Dickinson School 03M075 03M075 K-5 School Number (DBN): 735 West End Avenue, New York, NY 10027 212-866-5400 Phone Number: 212-866-5543 Fax: Arleen Liquori aliquor@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Arleen Liquori Milo Herranz Monique Lewis & Matt Hess Toni Corsello& TonishaAlexander SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lisa Walters na na vacancy District Information Geographical District: 03 Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 Street, Room 122, New York, NY Superintendent’s Office Address: ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center #5 YuetChu FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: 212-222-7816 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Arleen Liquori Milo Herranz Monique Lewis Lisa Walters Toni Corsello TainaMontalvo-Teller Cody Rosen *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Julia Goldstein TonishaAlexander Anne Marie Burrows Deirdre Garrett Scott Rachel King Christina Anderson Mercedes Eustache Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 75, The Emily Dickinson School, is to be a learning environment in which a diverse community of children meets or exceeds high academic standards. We believe the best outcomes result from full school-home collaboration, and we seek to engage families in all aspects of their children's education. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Narrative Summary PS75 is a neighborhood public elementary school providing quality education to a community whose rich diversity mirrors that of our city. We set high expectations for academic excellence. We are committed to helping each of our children perform at or above grade-level in literacy, math, science and social studies. Art, music and technology are integral parts of our academic efforts. Our children’s lessons are enriched by a wide variety of special experiences offered by New York City’s leading cultural institutions, including Studio in a School, Young People’s Chorus, Symphony Space, Dancing Ballrooms, Parsons Dance, Rugby USA, the Museum of Modern Art, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Boys Read, Learning Leaders, and the Metropolitan Opera. At P.S. 75, we work together to create a safe and stimulating environment where education is strengthened by respectful and responsive partnerships between home, school and the community. We seek to develop responsible, competent and independent students who are lifelong learners. We will enable each student to reach their full potential and become resourceful, contributing members of society. We will support students towards the highest achievement possible, celebrating the diversity of their academic ability and linguistic, cultural and socio-economic background. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Beginning in Fall 2013, PS75 began to host the Department of Education’s ASD NEST program for high-functioning children on the autism spectrum. These classrooms are staffed by two teachers, who have received additional training in areas such as Positive Behavior Supports, using visual organizational aids, and transition priming, which help to maintain a calm, positive environment that is conducive to learning for all students. 32% of our student population are students with special needs. PS75 offers an English/Spanish immersion program for grades K-5. Children master both languages, regardless of the language spoken at home. PS75 has two dual-language classes per grade, which demonstrates the administration's commitment to the program. 13% of our students are English Language Learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report of 2016, our school had made the most progress this year for continuously emphasizing that our rigorous curriculum and higher order thinking skill integrated lessons are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally, our school was also celebrated for collaborations among a majority of our teachers in the area of analyzing student data, specifically commended for goal cycles, teacher teams, and grade leaders. A key area of focus includes strengthening the bond even more between teachers, parents, principals and students. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M075 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 560 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 20 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 68.2% % Reduced Lunch 15.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 58.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 21.58 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 127 126 12 93.1% 5.2% 35.9% 21.4% 2.1% 3.9% 4 10% 6.5 44.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on all student metrics, PS75 is a high impact-high performance school compared to our district and the city. Impact measures school against expected outcomes, adjusted for incoming student factors. Performance is unadjusted performance. 2. The English Language Learner population is 14% of student body. ELLs scored in the 18th citywide percentile for ELA proficiency, and in the 23rd city percentile for ELL progress. Based on this data, Improving ELA scores and progress of our ELL population is a priority need for our school. source: NYC DOE 2017 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will incorporate supplemental digital literacy supports into the curriculum to support struggling readers as measured by 65% of K-3 students will move two reading levels as measured by running records. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Target Group(s) Teachers will use computer carts and iPads to have each student work on IXL, Envisions, and Raz-Kids. K-3 students 3-5 ELL students Teachers will implement small academic group instruction in all classrooms each day Teachers will use S.P.I.R.E for students who are not currently on grade level to improve letter-sound recognition and build fluency. Timeline What is the start and end date? September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A combination of professional staff, administration, teachers, and parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. One parent workshop will be held in English and Spanish, with options for translation services in other languages, to enable the access of supportive on-line resources. Academic worksheets including Instructions, user names and passwords will be sent home in English and Spanish. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PS 75’s Business Manager will allot funds for any additional workshop leaders who can lead workshops in Spanish with an American Sign Language translator for families with hearing impairments (ex. Fundations workshop). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of K-3 students will demonstrate an increase of 2 reading levels. By February 2019, 50% of ELL 3-5 students will increase 1 reading level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Proficiency levels, DRA Assessment, NYSESLAT Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This goal is aligned with the framework for great schools survey element scores relating to the supportive environment where our school received a score of 3.74. Student-centered learning environments develop students who push and support each other, creating a collaborative and generous atmosphere in the classroom. The classroom must support the social and emotional growth of all students. We established a Diversity and Respect for All subcommittee of the School Leadership Team in 2016, the mission of this subcommittee is below: Through curriculum and school-wide discussion, we will create a school climate that discourages bullying, harassment, intimidation, and discrimination against students based on their sexual orientation, ethnicity, national origin, religion, gender, or disability - based on the understanding that we have to tap the power of upstanders to interrupt hurtful behavior. That is, we have to enlist the whole school in creating respect for all. (Adapted from Morningside Center for Social Responsibility, NYCDOE's RFA partner.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all K-5 classroom teachers will have integrated 4 Diversity and Respect for All topics into the NYS Social Studies Framework in a culturally responsive manner as measured by a 3% increase (from 92% to 95%) on The Framework for Great Schools survey score - supportive environment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Diversity and Respect for All subcommittee of the School Leadership Team will collaborate with school guidance staff to choose and the subcommittee will vote on topics that affect our school community. The subcommittee will then create a framework using the Respect for All resources and suggest lesson plans and/or materials for classroom learning and discussion. By November, a Teacher Team will be established, with the same guidelines and allotted time as already-established Teacher Teams in order to work towards these goals. All students November: Parent/Teacher team established. Oct-Jun: Topic 1-4 implemented Teachers, SLT committee members, Administration, and guidance staff. Topics are shared during all-staff Professional Development by representatives from the Diversity and RFA parent/teacher committee. Lesson plans are devised by the committee, and implementation is established at October grade-level meetings with Assistant Principal guidance. Topics should begin in October and end in June. A debrief of best practices at the culmination of each topic will take place at grade-level meetings. The committee will create a survey for grade-level leaders to share feedback. Feedback will be submitted to the Diversity and RFA SLT subcommittee, who will then share at School Leadership Team Meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Engagement of families directly affected/represented in each unit of teacher-led curriculum through prior notice of the topic(s) and curriculum, an invitation to contribute and open and accessible Diversity/Respect for All meetings. Corresponding materials, will be shared with all families via a newsletter. These materials will also include a list of 2018-19 CEP 16  resources for families if they would like to delve-deeper into these topics and connect learning at school with learning at home. Once a 2018-19 subcommittee of school staff and families has been established in September, we will create a timeline for our topics and begin the above outreach to families to be conducted beginning of October. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A Diversity and Respect for All Affinity Group will be supported by administration. There will need to be an opportunity for interested teachers to sign up for the Affinity Group. The Affinity Group will meet during allocated Affinity Group meeting times on extended days. The Diversity and Respect for All subcommittee will also need 4-6 sessions during either extended day Professional Development time or Other Professional Work time that are not already allotted for Teacher Teams. The time will be used for planning, research, survey creating, data collecting, outreach, debriefing, meeting with families, etc. Diversity and Respect for All subcommittee members will present the topics to students via Student Council. Students should be involved in planning and in making topics of discussion visible throughout the school (poster making, etc.) Grade Leaders will be consulted about the content and implementation of the RFA modules. The debriefs will need approximately 15 minutes in the Grade Team meetings scheduled directly after each topic has been taught. The Diversity and RFA curriculum integration will recommend each classroom receive a copy of relevant materials (books, videos, etc), as well an extra copies for the school library. School administration (Principal and Assistant Principals) will provide leadership in rolling out approved teacher team curriculum. They will present the mission, goals and curricula at all-staff meetings during Professional Development at the beginning of each unit. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 the SLT Diversity and RFA subcommittee will create and administer a survey based on School Quality guide questions that will show in increase in the safety subsection of supportive environment of 3% from 92% to 95%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 17  Year-end survey will be created by SLT Diversity and RFA sub-committee and completed by grade-level leaders to assess best practices and areas for improvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the area of School Commitment, the school received a score of 92% positive, which is 9% above city and district averages. The priority need that will be addressed is in the area of Peer Collaboration, which received a score of 88% positive, which is - 3% below both city and district averages. This goal will allow an opportunity for teachers to develop, grow and learn from peers and experts in order for to have a strong influence on students’ achievement. The 2017-18 findings for the Quality Review recommend that teachers strategically plan higher-level cognitive tasks for English Language Learners (ELLs) and the highest- achieving students on a consistent basis. source: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, specialist and grade-level teachers will engage in inter-school and intra-school lab site professional development. The Peer Collaboration measurement under Collaborative Teachers in the Framework will increase 3% (from 88% to 91% positive). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Intra-School visitations: Teachers will determine, with the help of their immediate supervisor, two different classes they would like to observe during instruction and be allotted time for a debrief with all teachers involved. Teachers and Paraprofessionals. Intervisitation will begin in October 2018 and conclude in June 2019. Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate. Inter-School visitations: Administration will coordinate with other District 3 schools to arrange at least 1 off-site visitation for all specials teachers. Lab sites will be created accordingly across grades, subjects and teacher teams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to at a workshop each Cycle Goal Trimester to familiarize them with the Common Core Learning Standards and the new learning standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute coverage will be provided for teachers in order to be able to visit another classroom during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 the SLT Diversity and RFA subcommittee will create and administer a survey based on School Quality guide questions that will show in increase in the peer collaboration subsection of collaborative teachers of 3% from 88% to 91%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance of lab site visits and debrief notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The area of Teacher Influence at 83% positive is a strength in Effective School Leadership. This exceeded the district average by 2% and the city average by 5%. The area of Instructional Leadership at 83% in Effective School Leadership was 2% below the district average and 5% below the city average. This represents a priority need to be addressed. The 2017-18 Quality Review recommends that pedagogy have students engage in high levels of thinking and discussion leading to the development of meaningful work products across classrooms for all levels of students. source: School Quality Guide 2017-2018 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators in collaboration with the a newly established professional development committee will strengthen and improve the effectiveness of professional development that will result in a 5% increase from (83% to 88%) positive in the Instructional Leadership section of the School Quality Guide survey elements. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By November, a professional development committee will be formed in which the committee will meet once a month on a Tuesday to discuss opportunities for staff to be professional developed. All School Staff October 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers on the Professional Development Committee. The goal of the committee is to identify areas of interest and need. A list of potential topics along with instructional resources will be agreed upon with administration to address RFA, ELLs, Students with Disabilities, ELA, Math, etc . Professional development opportunities will occur every Monday, occasional Tuesdays. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to at a workshop each Cycle Goal Trimester to familiarize them with the Common Core Learning Standards and the new learning standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators and the Professional Development Committee will create schedule for professional development topics. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 the SLT Diversity and RFA subcommittee will create and administer a survey based on School Quality guide questions that will show in increase in the teacher influence subsection of Effective School Leadership of 3% from 83% to 86%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets for professional development sessions maintained by Main Office staff Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Parent Involvement in School, as measured by the School Quality Guide 2017-2018, compares favorably to City averages (+4%). 2. Outreach to School is even with both City and District averages, as measured by the School Quality Guide 2017-2018. The priority need will be to increase outreach to parents. A particular emphasis will be placed on outreach to parents of ELL and ICT students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, attendance at parent engagement events (workshops, open classrooms, etc) will increase to 10% of attendance for total events from 49% to 59% as recorded by sign-in sheets over 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families and caregivers of students. Engagement will begin in September 2018 and in June 20189. Families and caregivers of students. Engagement will begin in September 2017 and in June 2018. A combination of SLT committee members, teachers, administrators and the parent coordinator will work together to create a calendar of parent engagement events. A combination of SLT committee members, teachers, administrators and the parent coordinator will work together to create a calendar of parent engagement events. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement school-wide recommendations for parent-teacher engagement, including: (1) Teacher-led parent workshops will be held over the course of the year. The workshops will focus on topics including reading, writing, math, science, art, SEL, homework, special education, middle-school etc. Workshops will review what students are learning in school and provide recommendations and practical tips for parents to support learning at home. The workshop program will be introduced at curriculum night at the beginning of the school year. Workshops conducted exclusively in language appropriate for parents of ELL students will be held for each topic. One week prior to workshops, there will be a coordinated outreach focused on ELL and ICT caregivers via phone or in person. 2) Open classrooms or publishing parties will be held [at the end of each goal cycle] to highlight student work and foster strong family-community ties. (3) Parent-teacher conferences will use the student-led parent-teacher conference model in grades 3-5, enabling students to take ownership of their successes, articulate areas for improvement, and establish a clear focus of immediate and future goals. 2018-19 CEP 26 (4) Open house will be held for rising 5th graders at the end of the school year. An open house conducted exclusively in language appropriate for parents ELL students will also be held. (5) An Outreach Task Force will be established in September consisting of the Parent Coordinator, ESL teacher, supervisor of dual-language classes, and other staff members as appropriate. This team will coordinate the school’s extra effort to engage all families, including phone calls and direct invitations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To promote increased parent involvement, part of our school’s Title I, Part A allocation will be used to support parent involvement activities and programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By end of February 2019, the school will have conducted and logged at least 6 parent engagement activities with a 10% increase of parents attendance from 39% to 49% as recorded by sign-in sheets in year-over-year attendance. September - Open School Night October - Open Classrooms (Hispanic Heritage Celebration / Books Come Alive Celebration) November - Parent Teacher Conferences, Holiday Breakfasts, Academic Workshop December- Winter Concert January - Open Classrooms February - Academic Workshop, District Spelling Bee, Art Exhibit Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 27  Parent Engagement log. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Universal screening including F & P, NYS Test scores (K-5) NYS test scores, formative assessment In class assessment Social Studies Report card scores At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance counselor, School Psychologist, School Social Worker, coaches Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SPIRE, Max Scholar, Imagine Learning, Guided reading Remedial support based on standards Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1:1, tutoring During the school day Small group, 1:1, tutoring During the school day Remedial support based on cycle goals Remedial support based on cycle goals Small group, 1:1 Small group, 1:1 PBIS group, small group, 1:1 During the school day During the school day During the school day 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 20% of our student population. Students are given scholarships to attend after-school programs, clothing drives, food drives, gifts during the holidays, vouchers for school supplies, food and clothing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All new hires have already achieved HQT status. They joined a faculty that is already HQT. Differentiated teacher teams are implemented throughout the school year. Out of school. teacher chosen, professional development opportunities are encouraged. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is designed to meet the differentiated learning needs of the staff. A plan for professional development has been devised and is amended as needed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). " Turning fives" are tested in the spring to determine if they have special needs. Workshops are held for parents in order to assist preschool children on academic, behavioral, and social emotion supports that can be used both in school and at home. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teachers collaborate with their grade peers to create assessments based on CCLS. At each grade meeting, teachers reassess assessments created and revise in order to best service students. Teachers submit in the beginning of the year an assessment calendar, including all reading, math, social studies, and writing assessments, to their supervisor and continually revise and edit when determined it is needed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 258,581.00 135,461.00 11,200.00 0 3,340,518.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E 5A-5E 5A-5E 5A-5E 2018-19 CEP 33  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 34  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 75M , The Emily Dickinson School, Parent and Family Engagement Policy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Public School 75, The Emily Dickinson School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality Public School 75, The Emily Dickinson School Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Public School 75, The Emily Dickinson School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 75, The Emily Dickinson School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 38  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 39  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; . Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds will be used to provide instruction to ELLs, Long Term ELLs, and ELLs with special needs in the area of English Language Arts through scaffolding of the Core Knowledge Curriculum. Title III funds will be used to provide support for ELL students in the content areas using ESL methodologies such as paraphrasing high content reading, increasing academic vocabulary, graphic organizers, extended opportunities for reading and writing beyond the school day, and providing small group instruction. Teachers will provide students with supplemental instructional support that is aligned to the common core standards in the areas of reading, writing and academic oral language. Our quantitative data, based on our NYSESLAT, show a common issue amongst our ELLs and it pertains to the low writing scores which appear across the board. Therefore the Title III program will emphasized writing skills, specifically, expository writing. Our qualitative observations, such as student work collected in folders, completion of homework assignments and working independently, show that our ELLs have difficulty completing assignments and projects independently. Our ELL population generally come from low income homes, with parents or guardians with very little no formal education. The home language is usually limited and not academic. As a result, our ELLs lack the support at home that is needed to complete homework assignments and other academic tasks. We also have a sub group of students who are identified as having special needs. Some who require ICT and others Speech. We will provide all students the opportunity for guided reading and writing within small groups with an emphasis and instruction on answering text-dependent questions and summarizing texts. The materials used for grade 2 and the New Arrivals, come from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; "Antonyms and Synonyms" and "Random Acts of Kindness" which will help with oral language practice, leading into topics for writing. We want to foster strong community building which will in turn allow students to work together in reading and writing groups. We are also using Scholastic and a company called Teacher Made Resources. Some of the titles being used in the program are; "Fiction and Non-Fiction Paired text Passages" Differentiated Non-Fiction Paired Text Passage" and "Comprehending Text" Students will be grouped heterogeneously and paired when necessary in order to encourage accountable talk, peer editing, peer reading and team building activities, which will be incorporated at the at the beginning of every class. Students will have the opportunity to share their work with their partners and classmates and learn from each other. A built in "conference time" will be set aside for students to privately meet and work with their teacher for at least 10 minutes for each student. Students in grade 4 and 5 will be introduced to different literary genres and summarizing texts. The Teacher Made Resources books are all correlated to the Common Core. Some of the Titles are; "Fantasy and Folktales" and "Greek Mythology" by Scholastic. Writing will be supported by using a book on grammar called "Writing Skills" by D.H. King. These book has a methodical approach to teaching sentence structure, developing vocabulary and developing paragraphs. We are going to have a project based evaluation by the end of the 12th week where students should have a, poster, presentation or book that details the 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information topics and stories covered during the program. The program will be held on Thursdays from 2:35pm to 5:05pm and will run for a total of 14 weeks from December 1, to March 23rd. . The language of instruction will be English but the Native Language may be used at times when conferencing with Spanish speaking students who are new to the system. An ESL model will be used with New Arrivals who speak Spanish. All four teachers working the program are ESL/ Bilingual licensed. Three of the four teachers are also licensed as Bilingual Special Education teachers, which is a tremendous advantage since we have many students with special needs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All four teachers working in the Title III program will participate in an Language Development study group that will take place twice a month during Professional Development days on Tuesdays from 3:10 to 3:50 beginning in November until the end of March. These teachers will be the Title III teacher team that will run as a study group and familiarize themselves with the new Language Acquisition Levels. Ms. Herranz, the ESL teacher will facilitate the team's meetings by providing information to the team about the the phases of Second Language Acquisition. They will also discuss the students in the program. ELL students with IEPs will be looked at closely to ensure teachers are providing the appropriate accommodations. Dates and times for these teachers to meet will begin on Tuesdays December 6th until March 21st, from 3:10pm to 3:50pm. Audience / participators are Ms. Herranz, Mrs. Alvarez, Mrs. Silva and Ms. Eustache. This teacher team will read an essay made available by the office of English Language Learners called "Chaos for Dual Language Learners and Services Pre K-3". An Examination of State Policies for Exiting Children from Language Services Pre K-3." Rational: To understand the protocols that take place during the first few years of an ELL student's academic life and academic development. The group will hold discussions around the most updated polices found in CR Part 154. Ms. Herranz will also facilitate these meeting along with the help of Fanny Castro from the office of ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parent engagement activities will take place 3 times during the course of the Title III program. These activities will run approximately 30 minutes and will be held 3 times during the 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities course of the Title III dates. The goal of these meetings are to invite the parents to be a part of what's happening in the classroom during the Title III program. Topic 1: Meet and Greet your Title 3 teacher and discover what is being taught in the classroom. Rational: To foster relationships between parents, teachers and students participating in the program. To discuss expectations and curriculum. Date and Time: December 20st, February 7th and March 14th: All parents of ELLs participating in the program will be invited. During our first parent engagement time parents will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss the topics that will be taught. Topic 2: How to monitor and help your child with Max Scholar Computer Program. Rational: To encourage and empower parents to help their children use the technology they need to improve their reading and writing levels. The third and last parent engagement we plan on Celebrating Student's Success and Hard Work. Rational: Allow parents to see the cumulative work done by their children. Students will present to an audience of parents what they have learned and done during the 13 week program and students can share with families how they believe they have improved and their general feelings about the program and how it has helped them become better students. This will give students opportunity to share with their parents what they are learning in school. Parents of students being invited to the program will be notified of the program and the activities via letters sent home during the last week of November 2016 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 45 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Emily Dickinson School Borough Manhattan School Number 075 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert K. O'Brien Coach none ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miroslava Herranz ESL teacher Teacher/Subject Area Benelly Alvarez DL teacher Teacher/Subject Area Annie Silva DL Spec. Ed Related-Service Provider Shelley Linenbach Special Ed. Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Ravanda Oden and Alida Grafals Coach none School Counselor Denise Marklande Parent Carolina Graham/Lisa Valera Parent Coordinator Ana Gomez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 5 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 14 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 580 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.93% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English/Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 12 0 0 12 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Over the past two years we used Fontas and Pinnel in grades K-5 English and WRAP for Spanish to assess comprehension and reading fluency. At the start of this academic year, in September 2015, we changed over to the DRA assessment for grades K-5 and used the DRA in both English and Spanish to assess our ELLs. We find that data from these assessment tools reveals that our ELLs often do not perform at bench mark levels in either language, in the area of reading comprehension. Consequently we target those children for additional periods of support. The support is delivered in small groups. Guided reading groups are formed with a focus on phonics, letter sound identification, reading comprehension strategies , academic oral language development and vocabulary. The data collected allows teachers in each grade to address the needs of their students and develop lessons that aim at implementing strategies to help student progress. 2018-19 CEP 48  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: Student progress is tracked from grade to grade to monitor academic achievement and langugage acquisition. We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by periodically reviewing their exam histories, getting the feedback from DL classroom teachers, the ESL teacher, and service providers. This report also serves as a tool when tracking and evaluating the programs that we provide for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: Our school uses the DRA data and guided reading progress to help guide instruction and implement RTI. These two pieces of data guide us in planning instruction for ELLs and working towards a RtI framework that will suit our population. In Tier 1 our school uses Fundations curriculum for grades K-2. In grades 3-5 we use Expeditionary Learning. In grades K-5, Go Math is used. Teachers differentiate instruction as needed. Universal screening takes place 3 times a year using the DRA. In Tier 2, students get targeted for intervention in general education and special education. These students are grouped based on their area of weakness and their need in literacy and math. These students re discussed by the RTI/PPT team which consist of Ms. Linenbach, our IEP teacher, Ms. Bandele our bilingual school psychologist, Nannett Masia the school's bilingual social worker, Colleen Miller, the school's social worker, the ESL teacher, Ms. Herranz, the student's classroom teacher and when necessary the OT Yocheved Nathan Milo. The interventions used in Tier 1 and Tier 2 include Max Scholer and it's three components of phonics,vocabulary and reading. SPIRE is also used and implemented by teachers providing support/supplemental services. In Tier 3 the team meets to discuss the students who have not responded adequately to Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions. The same interventions are applied; Max Scholer, SPIRE, and small group instruction. The team discusses the language program the student is in and sample work is brought to meetings. The student's classroom teacher, parent and service providers are part of the meeting. We have three service providers, Ms. Silva, Ms. Linenbach and Ms. Eustache. All three teachers are licensed and bilingual. These teachers provide AIS services through small group instruction two to five times a week. They intergrate and also pull out small groups of students to provide these services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that throughout the grades, K-5, the majority of our student population falls into the Expanding level. The grades with the most students at the Entering level are found in first, second, third and fourth. All of those children are either new to the school system or have experienced some academic interruptions caused by transfers from other schools. The data reveals that in grades K-5, the majority of our students are scoring at the expanding level. We have a large number of students who have scored commanding in grades K-5. In the fifth grade, there is one student who has remained at the Entering, Beginning level througout his entire academic career, and that is because the student has severe learning disabilities. The data reveals that students approach the Comanding level as they progress in grades and the majority of our students are at the Expanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 49  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: The ENL program is delivered using an intergrated approach (push-in) and stand alone (pull out) model. The ESL teacher, Ms. Herranz the ESL groups children by level and grade. The students scoring at the entering and emerging level receive their mandated 360 min. a week of ENL. The students at that level are group as a mixed age group and are provided servies with a stand-alone model. Due to the mixed ages and grades of this group, the only way to provide the 360 minutes is through a stand alone model. Students range in grades first, second, fourth and one student in the fifthe grade who is extrememly learning disabled. It is impossible to provide another 4 periods of ENL to these students on their grade. This group requires small group instruction with a lot of language support with lots of visuals. We understand the new requirements to provide these services through two models and our goal to to try to make the changes as soon as possilbe. Because these students are in various grades, time constraints, such as different literacy, lunch and prep schedule make it almost impossible to group and due to the wide ranges in the grades, it is not possible to provide Intergrated services to 4 different classrooms an extra 4 periods a week for each class. There are ELLs who are placed in NEST classrooms, which is a program that uses an inclusive special needs model that forms classes of students who are autistic and the general population. Due to the nature of these classrooms, the Intergrated model is a difficult task. There is one NEST class on each grade, in grades K-2. There are ELLs who are in these classes that are part of the Stand-alone ENL groups. These NEST classes are very small, no more than 12 students and have very specific needs. Since the Intergrated ENL model is difficult to attain at our school in grades K-2, Ms. Herranz spends one period a week in the classroom of the ELLs who participate in the Stand-alone model. Her presence along with her effort to work with the ELLs provides the students with some Intergrated ENL experience. The Stand-alone model is implemented during the first part of the day from 8:10am to 10:45am. Students are grouped based on their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores and also based on their oral language development needs. The Intergrated model is utilized in the afternoon, where Ms. Herranz goes into grades 3-5, classrooms that are ICT. The Intergrated model is easier with these grades because ELLs are grouped by grade into a class on each grade. Ms. Herranz teaches whole class for the first 15minutes of the period. She is teaching a writing curriculum that is new to ours school. "Writing Skills" by Diana Hanbury King. She teaches a whole class mini lesson and then works with small groups of students who are ELLs, former ELLs. There are days when Ms. Herranz provides support in the content areas such as math and social studies. Students are grouped hetrogenously during whole class instruction and then homogenously during small group instruction. Proficiency levels vary, but are generally close enough to each other where when grouped, it works to the student's advantage. The students who receive ENL through the Intergrated model, are at similar levels and require 180 minutes of ENL/ELA and content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: The DL classes are hetrogenously organized with student ranging in proficiency levels. Kindergarten and first grade DL classes are based on age. We have one DL classroom in the second grade that is ICT. These students receive services and instruction based on the language of the day. Our school utilizes a roller coaster model of langauge, where the language of instruction is alternated from day to day. All content areas are taught in both languages. ENL is provided by the classroom teachers. Teachers group their ELLs homogenously during ENL isntruction. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 50  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: Dual Language teachers are provided with their students proficiency levels that are directly taken from the RLAT report. Across the grades, DL teachers provide their ELLs with their mandated minutes of ENL. Students who score at the entering and emerging level receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction and students at the transitioning and expanding level receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction a week. For students who require the 360 minutes of ESL, teachers closely look at their curriculum and adjust their insturctional time in order to serve these students. For students being provided services by Ms. Herranz, these students receive their mandated minutes of ENL through a push in and pull out model. Ms. Herranz pushes in to classroom of ELLs in grades 3-5. She provides 225 minutes of ENL a week. For students in grades K-2, she provides pull out ESL services based on their need. Students are grouped in a two ways, by grade and level, thus there are mixed age groups. The mixed age group consists of students who are at the emerging and entering level who require a lot of vocabulary and phonics. These students are all new commers except for one student in the 5 th grade who is very learning disabled. With the new levels of proficiency, Ms. Herranz will reconfigure her groups based on the scores and needs of the students. Schedules are put in place providing the appropriate number of mandated minutes. All classroom and program scheduels are kept by the principal in the main office.Paste response 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Dual Langauge Program, DL teachers use the designated language of the day, Spanish or English, to teach all content areas. The teachers use the Go Math curriculum in both English and Spanish. Students are exposed to academic and domain specific vocabulary in Spanish in math. Teachers utilize several langauge prompts and key vocbaulary terms/phrases throughough the math units to help students develop stronger oral and written lanaguage skills. Teachers expose students to several math strategies that include visuals to help them connect the connect to the concept. Dual Lanuage teachers use the “Senderos” curriculum to strengthen reading, writing, listening and speaking skills in Spanish. The “Senderos” curriculum includes thematic lessons which help the students to make text-to-text connections. In addition, each “Senderos” lesson has modified and differentiated support for students who are not approaching grade level standars. The “Senderos” curriculum utilizes SmartBoard technology to help students visualize the vocabualry and comprehend the texts. Dual Language teachers utilize the “Expeditionary Learning” ELA curriculum to teach reading/wriiitng/listening common core standars. The “Expeditionary Learning” curriculum focuses on reaidng shared texts with the classroom. The shared texts help students comprehend the langauge collectively. Teachers plan around the shared text with a focus on academic and domain specific vocabulary. Overall, sustained silient reading, writing, and math are taught every day. Science is taught in English and Spanish. The lower grade Science teacher provides students with visuals to help them understand content. The upper grade Science teacher is new to our school and she is bilingual and teaches science in Spanish to DL classes based on the language of the day. Dual Language teachers and the ESL teacher use graphic organizers and questioning strategies to provide support to the ELLs. In addition, ELLs are presented with sentence/language frames and vocabulary visuals to help them comprehend the content. ELLs are given ample waiting time to participate allowing them to process the langauge that is being presented to them orally and visually. Classroom teachers group their students and conference with each group at least twice a week to ensure that students are on task and understand what is expected of them. Language development is encouraged through the oral presentations of summaries, findings, and opinions based on projects or readings. Students are encouraged to self-monitor their understanding throughout the day helping them respond to the English Language in various ways. The ESL teacher pushes in during specific time slots when reading and writing are taking place in the classroom. This can happen during content area lessons. During this push in ESL time the ESL teacher works with a group of ELLs as well as former ELLs and any other children who would benefit from scaffolding and other ESL strategies.." 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have recently purchased the DRA for grades K-5. All classrroom teachers are using this assessment to assess their students in English. The DRA is also available in Spanish and our school utilizes the DRA Spanish in the Dual Langauge classroom to assess the home language. In addition, with our new “Senderos” curriculum students in Dual Language classes have periodic formal assessments found in the reading, writing, grammar, and spelling sections of “Senderos.” In “Go Math” 2018-19 CEP 51  students are assessed in their home language. Since math content is taught in both English and Spanish our dual language program is able to strengthen the hom langauges and assessed them through the chapter assessments found in Go Math. Each assessment is available in both English and Spanish. Alternate writing units are covered in Spanish and then children are accountable for meeting CCSS in Spanish. ELLs in general education classes are assessed in English with modifications to make the language accessible. The ESL and classroom teachers reread, paraphrase and explain vocabulary several times before assessment is recorded. ELLs are given more time to understand assignments and work in small groups during assesment. We have been fortunate to have a program called Boys Read that takes place in the library and supervised by the school's librarian. These students come in once a week and are paired off with ELLs and other students who can benefit from paired reading and discussions around reading. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a. Dual Language teachers and the ESL teacher plan adequately for SIFE students by creating mini lessons that paraphrase what is bieng taudght. SIFE students often work with another teacher or adult volunteer, to guide them in completing the outcomes and expectations of a task. These students require more time to complete assignments and more adult guidance. All SIFE students who are Spanish speaking are placed in a DL program. These students spend more time in school as they are asked to participate in after school programs that will help them. The ESL teacher works with these SIFE students during the Title III program and they are often included in pull out groups with younger children where the level of English and lessons are level appropriate. The focus tends to be vocabulary, oral language development, phonemic awareness, handwrting and gudided reading. These students are assessed periodically, through informal assessment measures such as teacher observations and notes, exit questions, illustrated or written responses by student and work that is kept in their folders. Formal assessments come in the form of the DRA, which is done three times a year. b. Our instructional plan for ELLs who have been in the US schools less than 3 years, is to have these newcomers participate in small group instruction, ensure they are receiving their ENL minutes of services and invite them to all after school, early bird, Title 3 and Saturday program that provide rigorous test preparation. This is the largest ELL population in our school. Teachers are well aware of the needs of these students. These ELLs receive their appropriate minutes of ESL and participate in a morning reading program called "Early Bird" which is a great literacy support we have in our school that is run by volunteers and some staff members, including our bilingual librarian, Brenda Gilmartin. These children are grouped by level during reading and math instruction and are carefully monitered by teachers. c. Our plan for ELLs who fall into the 4-6 year category, which we target as "At Risk" and assign staff memebers who are service providers to develop challenging goals and work with these students several times a week, in order to help them move up. We have a small number of ELLs that fall into this category. The ESL teacher reaches out to parents and encourages them to find further academic support beyond school hours. These students are invited to attend Title III programs and Saturday Academy. d. e. Our plan for former ELLs is to treat these children like ELLs, and we continue to provide ESL services for them as much as possible. The DL teachers provide ESL instruction daily and utilize visuals, small group instruction, scafforlding strategies, purposeful partner pairing and oral language support. These ELLs in the monolingual classes receive at least 2 to 3 periods of ESL services a week with Ms. Herranz during the pull out program. Most of these former ELLs are placed in push in classes in order to provide continued services for them. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: We meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs by placing these students in the least restrictive environment and placing them in monolingual ICT classes or proving SETTS to dual language ELLs. Currently, we only have one dual langauge ICT in the second grade. These classes follow the same curriculum and schedule that regular education classes 2018-19 CEP 52  follow. Our ICT classrooms have a cerified Special Ed. teacher teaching alongside with a regular Ed. teacher and provide students with frequent small group instruction, graphic organizers, paraphrasing of hi level text material, and applying modifications and accomodations during all content area instruction. The ESL teacher pushes into these classes to provide further support and scaffolding during small group instruction. Students are given long wait time when answering questions. Teachers utilize visuals and the opportunity to use technology, such as our recent purchase of Mac laptops. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: We have a number of providers that push in and pull out services and provide support. This year we have an IEP teacher, Ms. Linenbach. She provides SETSS services to ELLs in dual language and monolungual classes. Max Scholar phonics and reading is used. Ms. Linenbach ensures that all teachers are aware of IEP goals for the students in their class. Ms. Linenbach provides push in services while the ESL teacher is also providing push in services. Ms. Linenback works with ELLs and former ELLs in small groups implementing the SPIRE program, which is phonemically based and very structured. Our ELLs with Special needs is a growing population in our school. Teachers work closely to meet these student's goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: Our targetted intervention programs for ELLs who have below a 2 on the ELA and Math City Wide exams involves inviting these students to participate in after school help through a test prep program. We also have a large group of knowledgable tutors who have been working at our school for over 3 years. They work with small groups of 2-4 ELL students, providing extra help in which ever content area the student needs most. Most of these programs are provided in English with some help in Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: This upcoming school year we aim to improve the work that goes on within our Inquiry teacher teams. The ESL/DL Inquiry team is currently working on creating a curriculum calendar for 2015-16 that serves as a map, when looking at what's being taught across the grades. We recently hired a new Science teacher for grades 3-5 who is bilingual and she has been able to make that content more accessable to our ELLs in the dual language program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: We do not plan on discontinuing any services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: The guidance counselor Ms. Markland, our parent coordinaor Ms. Gomez, and our ESL teacher, Ms. Herranz, are available to meet with parents to inform them of supplemntal services offered at our school. We send written, translated notices home to all families. Ms. Fernandez, the 5th grade Dual Language teacher is actively involved with the 5th grade DL student population and their parents. She schedules tours to middle schools for parents and often serves as a translator. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: Instructional materials currently used to support ELLs are classroom libraries, computer based research projects, computer aided instruction and guided reading leveled books. In math, teachers use Go Math curriculum in English and Spanish and the online resouces used to support the content. "Go Math" offers a variety of student workbooks, enrichment activities and reteaching activities that are allligned to the CCLS. Imagine Learning was installed this past year and Max Scholar is also being used. New this year are the MaxScholar instructional workbooks which build English Langauge grammar skills and structured writing. Each students is given a workbook that allows students to connect what is being learned on the Online MaxScholar program with the workbooks which focus on paragraph structured wriitng, vocbualary develoopment using Greek and Latin roots, and overall grammar usage. This year, we have bought licenses with Brain Pop, 2018-19 CEP 53  Flocabulary and Raz Kids. The teachers utilize these online programs to promote and enhance student learning in all content area subjects. The visuals provided with these materials are of high-interest and ELLs are particularly engaged by the visuals. Our school has also acquired a new laptop cart with “MacBook” computers available for each student. Teachers plan their units of studies and include the use of these MacBooks in the unit so that ELLs are exposed to computer language and experiences. In addition, our ELLs are also invited to attend the Title III program that runs from the early winter until the Spring as well as our Saturday Academic Academy for those ELLs who have been designated as students who need academic intervention services. These programs are well attended by our students. Finally our students are also invited to attend Saturday Academy. Our school also has community and city organizations come in and offer our students real-life experiences that enhance and promote language development in ELLs. For example, our school has a partnership with Symphony Space, New York Historical Society, Ballroom Dancing, Aspalt Green Swimming Prgram, Lincoln Center Cine Kids, New Victory Theater, Snapple Theater, Chess Program, Studi in a School Art Program, and YPC Chorus. All our ELLs have access to these programs which enance their basic and academic oral and written langauge development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Native Language support is provided by implementing Senderos and its new writing curriculum . Students with a language other than English at home are encouraged to read in their native language. Our bilingual librarian has purchased an extensive collection of Spanish language books at all levels. Students are able to check out library books and also borrow books from the classroom libraries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: Required services and support and resources correstond to ELL's ages and grade levels. Ms. Herranz the ESL teacher shares a room with the IEP teacher Ms. Linenbac These teachers meet informally on a regular basis to ensure that ELLs are properly serviced in each grade and according to their IEPs. Ms. Herranz attends the IEP meetings of ELLs. Ms. Herranz meets regularly with the Bilingual Speech pathologist Ms. Campbell to discuss services, supports and monitor students and their progress. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: Instructional materials currently used to support ELLs are classroom libraries, computer based research projects, computer aided instruction and guided reading leveled books. In math, teachers use Go Math curriculum in English and Spanish and the online resouces used to support the content. "Go Math" offers a variety of student workbooks, enrichment activities and reteaching activities that are allligned to the CCLS. Imagine Learning was installed this past year and Max Scholar is also being used. New this year are the MaxScholar instructional workbooks which build English Langauge grammar skills and structured writing. Each students is given a workbook that allows students to connect what is being learned on the Online MaxScholar program with the workbooks which focus on paragraph structured wriitng, vocbualary develoopment using Greek and Latin roots, and overall grammar usage. This year, we have bought licenses with Brain Pop, Flocabulary and Raz Kids. The teachers utilize these online programs to promote and enhance student learning in all content area subjects. The visuals provided with these materials are of high-interest and ELLs are particularly engaged by the visuals. Our school has also acquired a new laptop cart with “MacBook” computers available for each student. Teachers plan their units of studies and include the use of these MacBooks in the unit so that ELLs are exposed to computer language and experiences. In addition, our ELLs are also invited to attend the Title III program that runs from the early winter until the Spring as well as our Saturday Academic Academy for those ELLs who have been designated as students who need academic intervention services. These programs are well attended by our students. Finally our students are also invited to attend Saturday Academy. Our school also has community and city organizations come in and offer our students real-life experiences that enhance and promote language development in ELLs. For example, our school has a partnership with Symphony Space, New York Historical Society, Ballroom Dancing, Aspalt Green Swimming Prgram, Lincoln Center Cine Kids, New Victory Theater, Snapple Theater, Chess Program, Studi in a School Art Program, and YPC Chorus. All our ELLs have access to these programs which enance their basic and academic oral and written langauge development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 54  Paste response to question here: During the last two month of school, May and June, when registration is taking place and admitting Newly enrolled ELLs, Ms. Herranz schedules meeting for those families. The programs are explained to parents and the process is explained. These families are given the option to enroll in the DL program. During the first two weeks of the program, each grade plans a curriculum morning event or an evening pot luck dinner. Parents are invited as well as their children. Teachers get to meet with the parents to discuss any questions parents may have concerning the academic year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: We do not offer language electives in our elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: a. The DL model used at at PS 75 is a self-contained model. Our EPs and ELLs are inegrated during the entire school day. Spaces are shared where students come into contact with each other on a regular basis and students share lesson experiences that are taught by specialist. Students are intergrated during Chorus time which is several times a week during the last period of the day. We also have a theatre teacher who is new to our school and she teaches a lot of oral language development. Students come together and collaborate on presentations. b. Again, the Core Content is taught in the language of the day. Unfortunately, the core content is not translated in Spanish and teacher spend an enormous amount of time translating core content that is not available in Spanish. c. Our DL teachers are presently wokring out a language schedule for grades 1-5. Ideally we'd like to have all DL classes teach in Spanish on Mondays and Wednesdays, English on Tuesdays and Thursdays and on Fridays Spanish is taught during the first part of the day and English after lunch. We use the 50/50 English/Spanish language model and all content areas are taught in the language of the day. Kindergarten teachers use the roller coaster model where they begin the week with Spanish and the following day it's English. d. Dual Language teachers teach emergent literacy to their Spanish speaking students by organizing Spanish dominant groups within their classrooms. Guided reading groups take place every according the langauge of the day. Senderos and the DRA in Spanish are used. The focus is fluency in reading, writing and grammar. Senderos has CDs that are used in the classroom as support. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to questions here: 1. The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school involves teacher teams that meet twice a month, along with PDs that take place once a month at the school level. Over the past year, the DL-ESL teacher team, which has a subdivision of a group of teachers that meet as the Title 3 team, meet twice a month and have discussed the following topics during the 2015 academic school year: "Developing Academic Language", "What are the needs of our Special Education Dual Language and ELL Students", "5 Key Strategies for ELL Instruction," and " Looking at the five 2018-19 CEP 55  stages of Language Acquisiton." Dual Language teachers meet weekly on grade level, and all of our teachers are part of weekly grade meetings. In grades K-2 teachers have focus groups that plan and implement the PAF (Preventing Academic Failure- a phonics based curriculum) program. Grade 2 is also implementing the Portland Curriculum. Teachers collaborate and plan monthly. They work on pacing charts that describe what is being taught in all the content areas. These pacing charts serve as time lines and a reference point across the grades. Teachers discuss and plan celebrations and publishing parites for students to share and display their work with parents and school community. Teachers are grouped into these teams by subject and not grade. Ms. Linenbach, our IEP teacher, attends monthly meetings, through the Special Education Liason Office. Topics such as "Practices for Inclusion" "Compliance Issue" and Instructional Practices" have taken place this year. Ms. Herranz attended a three part series last Spring presented by the Office of ELLs, CFN on "Best Practices on Promoting Academic Language amongst ELLs." She also attended a PD on "Vocabulary Developemnt" that was given at NYC and part of the NEST program curriculum and practices on best practices in teaching vocabulary. Paste response to questions here: Ms. Fernandez is a 5th grade DL teacher with over 25 years of teaching experience. Ms. Peralta is a DL 4th grade ICT classroom teacher. Ms. Salas is a 4th grade DL teacher. Ms. Acevedo a 3rd grade dual language teacher, Mr. Mota is a 1st grade DL teacher and Ms. Herranz who is the ESL teacher for grades K-5. They are all part of an ESL/DL Inquirty, team that meets twice a month. This Inquiry team is curruntly working on curriculum maps that detail the units being implemented across the grades. They discuss their ELL population and ways to incorporate Spanish instruction in the content areas. Each team member gets the opportunity to share out with grade teams and discuss agendas, findings, and topics that deal specifically with the ELL population. The Office of ELLs also offers a variety of workshops that are available to our teachers. Recently one of our teachers attended "Nuts and Bolts Training: Preparing to Serve ELLs and Their Families." 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Our bilingual guidance counselor works closely with DL teachers and the ESL teacher in assisting ELLs in applying to middle schools. Ms. Markland, our guidance counselor, Ms. Herranz, the ESL teacher, Ms. Fernandez, our 5 th grade DL teacher with over 30 years of experience, and our Parent Coordinator Ms. Gomez, meet with parents of fifth grade students who will be graduating and entering Middle school. Information on Middle schools and the programs they have to offer is explained to parents and students. ELLs are coached in preparing for middle school interviews. The ESL teacher, Ms. Herranz along with the guidance counselor Ms. Markland shcedule groups of ELLs to meet with them when reviewing their middle school applications and setting up appointments for middle sschools. Ms. Herranz provides interclassroom visitations, to support teachers in the 5 th grade who are working on middle school essays. Ms. Herranz assists with the writing process. Paste response to question here: Our school encourages teachers of ELL students to take part in the many PDs offered by the Office of ELLs. Dual Language teachers meet weekly, on grade level and plan lesson together, discuss student progress and strategies to further help students with learning disabilities. Agendas are maintained as well as sign in sheets. When teachers leave the building for PD, forms are completed and filed in the office by the secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Our parent coordinator Ana Gomez, our Principal, Mr. O'Brien, AP Ms. Grafals, our school social worker, Denise Markland and our ESL teacher Ms. Herranz hold meetings for parents at the beginning of the school year, once before the winter break and again during the spring. During the Fall meeting, parents are invited into the auditorium during the first period of the day and a presentation takes place and parents are informed of grade and school wide goals, progress reports, citywide exams, including the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, and the procedure for parents to make appointments with their child's teachers to attain language proficiency assessment results and their childs' development and 2018-19 CEP 56  progress in all the contenct areas. Most of of our ELL parent population is of latino descent and the translations can be provided by three of the members who are presenting. When a language other than English or Spanish is needed, those parents are directed to Ms. Herranz, and she then sets up appointments to meet individually with these families. She has not had the need to refer to the new telephone number recently distributed to schools that provide immediate interpretation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to questions here: 1. Our parent coordinator Ms. Gomez has an open door policy. She evaluates the needs of our population in three ways. She conducts group meetings, provides time to parents for private meetings and takes recommendations from classroom teachers who have requests that their parents have made. Ms. Gomez is bilingual and works closely with our PTA. Together they organiz after school programs that serve ELLs and EPs. The PTA helps the Parent Coordinator with the grade pot-luck dinner at the beginning of the year. Parents are invited to visit classrooms during celebrations, publishing parites and the Principal-Parent Chat that take place monthly. Ms. Markland and Ms. Gomez partner up to provide workshops for parents of ELL students. Some topics include:a) How to help your child with their homework. b)Selecting books and reading with your child. c) Learning about free and local resources, such as libraries and universities tha tallow parents and their chidlren to use computer labs and facilities. She provides ELL parents with information and appliations to free summer camps, holiday camps and tutoring services. The DL teachers have been celebrating important holidays with their students and their families. During Thanksgiving, and other holiday events, classes come together to present songs and other performances where parents are invited. These celebrations, publishing parties and potluck dinners provide a time for parents to come together and mingle with other parents as well as the staff. The atmosphere is always positive and festive. This is somehting our school has been doing for many years. We also have a high level of parent involvement at our school. The parents are part of an email group and they send out a weekly Newsletter that informs the parents and school community of what is happening. Every year the PTA also organizes a very large fundraiser that has been very successful for many years. They raise money to pay for the art teachers we have in the school and also for venues that allow exhibits and performances. Ballroom dancing is another activity that invites parent involvement, especially during the preparation and compettion phase. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert O'brien, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Emily Dickinson School School DBN: 03075 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert K. O'Brien Title Principal Ravanda Oden/Alida Grafals Assistant Principal Ana Gomez Parent Coordinator Miroslava Herranz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carolina Graham Parent Benelly Alvarez 4 th grade DL Teacher/Subject Area Annie Silva, DL Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Denise Markland School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Shelley Linenbach Other IEP teacher Christiane Bandele Other School spychologist Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 9/8/15 1/1/01 9/8/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 60  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 61  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 62 
