2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M083 School Name: P.S. 083 LUIS MUNOZ RIVERA Principal: FRANCES CASTILLO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Luis Munoz Rivera – 310400010083 Pre-K through five School Number (DBN): 083 219 East 109 th Street New York, NY 10029 212-860-5847 212-860-6037 Phone Number: Fax: Hazel Cruz Hcruz3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Frances Castillo Susan Kowal Jenny Cardena Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Rachel Hershkowitz SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Clarisa Gonzalez None None 21 Century Grant- City Year- Jahna Orazno CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 04 Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 th Street New York, NY 10035 Superintendent’s Office Address: AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th avenue NY, NY 10001 8 th floor Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frances Castillo Susan Kowal JennyCardena Selina Melendez Nissikah Yehudah N/A N/A Jahna Orzano Rachel Kaplowtiz Ellen Erman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/City Year 21 century Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Claudia Ayber Maria Fernandez Clarissa Fernandez Maria Mosso Magdalena Moran Nissikah Yehudah Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Theory of Action – When instructional leaders streamline assessments to facilitate the analysis for targeted instruction, provide teachers with consistent opportunities to engage in professional learning communities, provide external collaborations to enhance structures for professional learning, and leaders walk the walk alongside PLC’s to 2018-19 CEP 9  enhance their own knowledge and provide opportunities to conduct targeted inter-visitations and attend external professional development as per needs and interest, then pedagogy will become better equipped at deconstructing and interpreting the NGLS, they will be able to effectively determine areas of instructional focus via data analysis. This in turn, will allow all teachers to plan rigorous task based on students' entry points into grade level standards ensuring all students including ENl's, SWDs, and high achieving students excel to their highest GNLS potential minimizing the achievement gap. Mission – At Public School 83, our mission is to provide the highest quality education in a secure, positive, and challenging environment for all students fostered by a cooperative effort between school and community. We aim for an atmosphere of cooperation with respect for individual differences and community values. VISION – Our vision is to create a challenging learning environment that encourages high expectations for success through the development of appropriate differentiated instruction that allows for individual differences and learning styles. We commit to an effective and responsive system of support that will maximize student potential. All learners are encouraged to be self-sufficient, responsible, cooperative and caring members of our community. WE BELIEVE 1. Respect for each individual is fundamental to teaching and learning. 2. All children can learn given appropriate time, instruction, and access to resources at different entry Level 3. Students benefit academically in a safe, supportive and stimulating environment. 4. Students’ learning, attendance, and behavior improve when they are actively engaged in meaningful work 5. Education is a shared responsibility. It is a partnership of home, school and community. 6. An effective balance and interdependence must exist among the written curriculum, instruction in the classroom, and assessment for and of learning. 7. High standards and expectations must be maintained through a system of accountability for all students, staff and parents 2018-19 CEP 10  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 83, Luis Munoz Rivera School is located in the heart of East Harlem, a community located in a mixed socio - economic area in District 4. Out of the 429 students 65.5 are Hispanic, .01 are American Indian, .18 % are black, 11.42% are Asian AND .006% Hawaiian/Pacific Island. We take pride in creating an environment that is safe, nurturing and promotes individuality within the members of our school community. In addition, our students understand that in order for our school to be great the members of our school community must always understand and accept the importance of being good and respectful citizens The administrative make-up of our school is composed of a principal and an assistant principal. We have twenty five classroom teachers. Three are self-contained special education teachers, three are integrated special education co-teachers, and the remaining are general education teachers. We also have one reading/data specialist, English as a new language teacher, one guidance counselor, two speech providers, one part-time occupational therapist, one part-time physical therapist, one hearing specialist provider, and four cluster teachers supporting our gym, art, math and content program. The position of parent coordinator continues to fulfill the role of parent liaison as per Department of Education and supports our efforts towards ensuring parents are actively involved in the academic success of our children. Public School 83 seeks to achieve its vision by enhancing our curriculum through external partnerships such as:  Hunter College student teachers  Hunter College Project Read Program  Carmel Hill Accelerated Reader  Ameri-core City Year  Randall’s Island Sports  El Barrio Art Class Connection  Asphalt Green Swimming Classes  Concrete Safari These partnerships enrich our curriculum by infusing the arts, literacy, environmental and health education in our daily learning and supporting instruction through after-school programs and small group instruction. For this upcoming 2018-2019 school year we will continue enhancing our curriculum by working collaboratively with District 4's Advanced Literacy initiative. Our goal is to strengthen a Community of Independent Writers via a variety of 2018-19 CEP 11  genre/standards rich writing coupled with student checklists for self-assessment and authentic teacher feedback and heighten the rigor in all areas of instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Public School 83 is a collaborative, caring community composed of dedicated faculty, earnest and intellectually curious students and supportive and concerned parents. Through celebrations and traditions, professional development, partnerships and grants, we support and strengthen our school culture and sense of pride in our school community. Within our school community we have 14% of students with special needs ranging from learning disabilities to social emotional disabilities. Although these students have specific needs they are never made to feel different. On the contrary, they are inclusive in all our efforts. Activities and are continuously celebrated for their hard work and strides. In addition to the mandated services they receive we make it a point to continue fostering and addressing their needs via our many support and enrichment programs such as City Year Ameri-Core members, Positive Behavior Intervention program, Student Government, Community Service Program, After School Programs, RTI, etc. We also have 10% of students who are English New Learners. These students are also afforded the same opportunities as all students in our school community regardless of their language deficiencies. It is via our inclusivity efforts that we help nurture and support their language development. It is our goal to continue their language development by focusing our energies in allotting them with the maximum amount of opportunities to engage in social interactions that require discussions via a variety of instructional tasks. We also have 0.13% of students who are living in shelters. Often these students are in need not only of social/emotional support but also financial support. As a school we try to mediate those needs by providing them with at risk counseling or connect the families to our Mt. Sinai Clinic. We also provide these students with school supplies and uniforms to ensure that learning is not impeded as a result of finances. Throughout the school year we also connect our families to our parent coordinator who supports them and provides them with information in whatever areas they need ie: child care, after school programs, enrichment programs, medical, financial etc. Workshops are also held to provide all families with information and resources to further support them. 2018-19 CEP 12  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As we begin school year 2018-2019 reflecting on the accomplishments of the past year working with a strong team of teachers, outside organizations and math and literacy consultants our teachers are becoming cognizant of the vertical progression of the New Generation Learning Standards. As an effect, our curriculum is more reflective of the standards. Our teachers have been successful at refining the Ready Gen curriculum and making it our own while keeping to literacy methodologies and the demands of the Instructional shifts: a balanced curriculum: 50/50 split of fiction and non-fiction, staircase of text complexity, knowledge in the disciplines, text based answers, writing from sources and academic vocabulary. This is substantiated by the Principal’s PPO Feedback which states an area the school does well is school leaders and faculty strategically adopt Department Of Education curricula to ensure that we provide instruction aligned to Standards and integrate the shifts leading to all students having access and engaging in high level tasks. Our curriculum is now aligned and uniformed from Kindergarten to 5th grade as opposed to two curriculum's which supported K-2 and grades and 3rd through 5th grades. The school now employs vertical and horizontal aligned rubrics that determine student growth through time, as well as, student checklists for self-assessment which facilitates building meta-cognition. . Another area of accomplishment has been our growth in the Danielson Framework. Our teachers have a clearer understanding of the expectations that support each of the domains within the framework. As per our observations, it is evident that teachers are adhering to recommendations and progress is being made as teacher implement instructional strategies and methodologies in the classroom. Utilizing the data analysis spreadsheet from Advance data shows that calibrations amongst administrators fair out pretty closely to one another. This signifies a common understanding of the process and norming practices. Based on our data generated from Advance, the greatest need lies in domain 3B questioning and discussion and domain 3: Instruction, predominantly in component 3c: engaging students in learning. As per our goal from the previous year, we are extremely proud of our accomplishment with parent involvement. After careful review of our data, our parent participation rate increased by over 200% from one year to the next. During the 2016-2017 school year Our data indicates we had a total of 468 parent participation in school wide events, parent meetings, During the 2017-2018 school year we had 972 parent participation. Although we made significant gains, we still need to work on parent engagement Tuesday which has not been as productive as evidenced by 2018-19 CEP 13  signature sheets at teacher created instructional workshops. As per parent signature sheets data shows that during parent engagement Tuesday we had a approximately 3% of parents attending Looking at teacher surveys it is evident that our professional development plan needs redirection to meet the differentiated needs of our teachers. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 57% of our teachers say they would like to work with other teachers from other schools on professional development. Teachers have expressed the need to attend sessions that specifically address their areas of need and interest as opposed to whole group sessions. As per Superintendent's visits during the 2017-2018 school year it was recommended that we formalize and consistently monitor a writing on demand process simultaneously and alongside the reading process to build the necessary stamina for students to engage in rigorous work of the upcoming units of study and ongoing formative and summative assessments to leverage the data collection, analysis and review of student progress overtime across the school vertically and horizontally. We continue to ensure that curricula and academic tasks emphasize rigorous habits. In addition, there is the need for classroom discussions to embed more Depth of Knowledge levels 3 and 4 questions and tasks aligned to Depth of Knowledge levels 3 and 4. 2018-19 CEP 14  2018-19 CEP 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M083 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 439 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 35 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 84.1% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 63.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.1 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 31 32 92.2% 5.2% 21.0% 18.0% 12.3% 1.6% 2 3% 8.7 54.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Quality Guide data of 2017-2018 shows a small decline of .05% from 2016 2017 school year to 2017-2018. Although we had a decline from one year to the next, this school year we have strengthened tasks within our curriculum that align to Common Core. We have successfully incorporated math exemplars into every unit of study within our math curriculum as well as utilized the resources provided by ANET to plan math task that support the three levels of mathematical rigor ie: conceptual, procedural and application. As a result, we are better at challenging students and providing scaffolds appropriate to rigor. There is still a need for students to understand the conceptual component of mathematics in order to continue building and expanding on mathematical concepts across the ladder of complexity within the standards. When students have the conceptual understanding of the math content it supports the other aspects of rigor ie: procedural and skill and application of skills. In the area of literacy, we have incorporated Literacy Design Collaborative (LDC) modules in grades 3 and 5 ensuring the creation of rigorous writing about reading tasks. We still need to continue building the capacity of developing rigorous task in ELA across the grades vs just grade bands. There is also the need to thread their learning across multiple contexts and the real world. We want students to understand the connection of what they learn in school to how it impacts them in the outside world. Reflecting on our needs at the end of last year we have made great strides in planning coherent instruction via our data analysis cycles and protocols. As a result, teachers are better able to plan targeted rigorous instruction at each child entry point into the Common Core standards. As per our 2017-2018 Advance data we had a decrease of 3% from 11% to 8% of teachers rating developing in the area of planning coherent instruction and a 4% decrease from 12% to 8% in engaging students in learning. We attribute this decrease to teachers being able to deconstruct standards, analyze data and internalize units and lessons to plan and execute instruction to student need as well as rigor Students need to understand the conceptual component of mathematics in order to continue building and expanding on mathematical concepts across the ladder of complexity within the standards. When students have the conceptual understanding of the math content it supports the other aspects of rigor ie: procedural and skill and application of 2018-19 CEP 17  skills. We want to see students thread their learning across multiple contents and the real world. We want students to understand the connection of what they learn in school to how it impacts them in the outside world. Another need as per the data from School Quality Guide and Advance is developing the quality of student discussion. More specifically is having students use data or text references to support their idea when engaging in discussions about text read and mathematical concepts. We also need to develop students ability to provide each other with feedback. A priority for the upcoming 2018-2019 school year is to ensure we are providing 100% of school leaders, pedagogues and staff with professional development focusing on understanding causes of inequities and researching best practices with regards to equity and diversity management in order to increase student progress and performance schoolwide with a particular focus on sub populations. We believe that with a solid understanding of causes of inequities and with researched best practices coupled with our continued growth within planning coherent instruction and engaging students in learning we will be able to bridge the achievement gap and ensure all students regardless of color, creed, language, socio economics are able to compete with the same level of expectations as per the common core standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 18  By June 2019, 90% of teachers will plan literacy task based on texts that are appropriately complex in terms of qualitative measure ie: structure, syntax, language and knowledge. The language of the text is explicit and text dependent. The task encompasses the application of spiraled standards, its open ended, thought provoking and allows for students to demonstrate their metacognitive thinking through the process of completing the task utilizing textual evidence. This in turn will impact student engagement as they become better equipped at identifying entry points within the NGLS and curriculum as evidenced by a 20% increase on ELA state exams. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will plan math tasks that have a balance of conceptual understanding, procedural and application of concepts and skills (three aspects of mathematical rigor) impacting student engagement as they become better equipped at identifying entry points within the NGLS and curriculum as evidenced by a 20% increase on Math state exams. Students need to understand the conceptual component of mathematics in order to continue building and expanding on mathematical concepts across the ladder of complexity within the standards. When students have the conceptual understanding of the math content it supports the other aspects of rigor ie: procedural and skill and application of skills. 2018-19 CEP 19 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher Planning: Grade teams use their common prep and professional planning time Teachers will use protocols in collaborative teacher teams to assess the rigor of instructional tasks in lesson plans. Teacher teams will use the LDC task templates aligned with common core and Depth of Knowledge Matrix to assess that tasks scaffold and/or focus on Level 3 and 4 skills of the Depth of Knowledge Cycles of lesson/task fine tuning after analysis of assessment data during extended Monday professional development Grade 9/2018 Level to Teams Grade 6/2019 9/2018 Level to Teams Grade 6/2019 9/2018 Level to Teams Grade 6/2019 10/2018 Level to Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Monthly Inter-visitations with protocols for observing teacher practice and student engagement with tasks Classroom Teachers Teams Implementation of new math program EUREKA Engage NY Classroom Teachers 6/2019 10/2018 to 6/2019 9/2018 to Teachers will continue to utilize QTEL strategies alongside the Bilingual Common Core Initiatives New Language Art progressions to plan and execute lessons supporting our ENL population. Classroom Teachers 6/2019 Grade Leaders 9/2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader 6/2019 Grade Leaders 2018-19 CEP 20 Time scheduled with Literacy Consultants for developing clear plans for next steps within Balanced Literacy components to support student success with literacy tasks (Hunter College) Classroom Teachers Small group strategy/Guided Reading utilizing data to meet specific instructional needs of students Classroom Teachers Guided Reading three times a week with added component of writing about reading, Classroom Teachers 9/2018 to 6/2019 9/2018 to 6/2019 10/2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader Grade Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader 6/2019 Grade Leaders SRSD Strategies in Writing to support specially designed instruction (SDI) Classroom Teachers 10/2018 to Principal, Assistant Principal Instructional leader 6/2019 Grade Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to “Curriculum Night” in the beginning of the year to provide them with information and resources on ways to help their children meet the needs of the curriculum, grade specific standards and Citywide Instructional Expectations. The various channels of communication will be shared at this time. The school's instructional goals will also be discussed. Open School Day twice a month for half hour session where parents have the opportunity to engage in their child's daily instructional schedule. Parents acquire strategies that can be implemented at home with children. Parents are provided with tools to assist with the implementation of strategies around literacy and mathematics. Parent Coordinator will plan and schedule alongside collaborators to craft the following: Parent workshops in six week cycles focused on the Common Core Learning standards will be provided by teachers and the Learning Leadership Organization. The Multi lingual Learner teachers will conduct workshops with parents to address the needs of English language learners. The fourth grade science teachers will familiarize parents with the NYS science exam and how to support their children. The Math Instructional Leader/ Century 21 providers / City Year will conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI). 2018-19 CEP 21  United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Parent Engagement on Tuesdays is used to inform parents of student progress and strategies they can use to support their children in all areas of need in reading. Differently abled workshops provided by service providers for parents. Literacy instructional leader will provide workshops on exposing parents to our teaching and learning cycles with protocols. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide program school, we will incorporate Conceptual Consolidation which will allow us to combine Federal and local funds to include Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds and Title IIA Supplemental and human resources to maximize our budget resources to improve student achievement. Tax levy monies will be appropriated to allow for hiring substitute teacher for professional development coverage. Schedule adjustment will be made to accommodate inter-visitations. Title I School Wide Program will be appropriated to purchase resource materials to support professional development plan. i.e. professional articles, consultants. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-point benchmark will be a minimum of a half year’s growth from the child’s entry point from September to January of 2019. As per our school-wide promotional criteria it is expected that students should attain a least half of the criteria listed below. K, 1, 2 Must show progress towards meeting CCLS. Promotion decisions are made by the PID Committee Reading Letter names 20:26 Writing Math Letter sounds 20:26 Letter formation K CAP Sentence formation Sight words Sight words Independent Lev. Number Sense (1-10) Calculations to 10 2018-19 CEP 22  1 65% Cumulative Score or 60% movement in independent levels Level 2 score 2 65% Cumulative Score or 60% movement in independent levels as evidenced by:  Classwork /homework  Projects  Comprehension assessments (literal/inferential) Student interviews  Report cards  Apps   Videos   Running records  Checklists  Reading conferences State exams 65% or greater Number Sense Calculations Word Problems 65% of current grade level OR 65% of instructional grade level Calculations and Word Problems as evidenced by: Level 2 score based on instructional grade level  Exemplars (instructional grade  Writing conferences  Checklists  RUBRICS (instructional grade level) level) Student work   Projects  Group work  Chapter tests State exams   Checklists Grades Third through Fourth Grade Reading 65% Cumulative Score or 60% movement in independent levels as evidenced by: Writing Math Level 2 score based on instructional grade level Student writing samples   Writing conferences 65% of current grade level OR 65% of instructional grade level 2018-19 CEP 23  Classwork /homework  Projects  Comprehension assessments (literal/inferential)  Checklists  RUBRICS (instructional Calculations and Word Problems as evidenced by: grade level)  Exemplars (instructional Student interviews  Report cards  Apps   Videos   Running records  Checklists State exams Reading conferences grade level) Student work   Projects  Group work  Chapter tests State exams   Checklists  60% movement is based on entry point + end of grade level = span of levels  If a student enters 1st grade at a level A and the end of grade level is Lev J then there is a span of 10 levels. Did the student make 60% or greater growth? If the student is reading at a Lev G by May/June then the answer is yes. This student has met one of the criteria. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) For the school year 2018-2019 we will be utilizing the following schoolwide assessments to track student progress and performance: Carmel Hill Accelerated STAR EARLY K-2nd and STAR LITERACY2nd -5th, STAR MATH K-5th, ANET Literacy and Math 2nd -5th, Richardson Running Records K-5th, EUREKA mid and post assessments alongside Exemplar rubrics K-5th, Lucy Caulkins Writing Progressions and ultimately state assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide data some of the strengths relative to the framework of Supportive Environment are: Classroom Behavior: an average of 90% of our teachers say that our students’ behavior in the classrooms are positive. Students respond to directions, follow rules, pay attention, do their work and students try hard to get good grades. Safety: 91% of our teachers say that students are safe outside and inside of the school. Data shows that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria and within their class. This data is supported by parent data which shows that approximately 96% of our families say our school is safe and the school agents promote a safe and respectful environment. Peer Support for Academic Work: 91% of our teachers say that students feel it is important to come to school every day, pay attention in class and that students try hard to get good grades. 94% of our families say they are satisfied with the overall quality of their child’s teacher and the education their child has received. Families of students with special needs expressed that the school works to achieve the goals on their child’s educational plan and provide their child with a wide variety of activities and services to help improve outcomes for their child. Social Emotional: 92% of teachers say that adults help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework, they encourage students and tell students they can achieve high standards as they teach critical thinking skills to students. Teachers teach students to advocate for themselves and the organizational skills needed to be prepared. 97% of our families expressed that our school offers them with a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities and services to keep their child interested in school and we make them aware if there are any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child’s academic performance. Overall, our school has implemented structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture and students’ success. Although we rated high in the social emotional component, there is still a need to work on strengthening areas to ensure the academic and social success of all our students. As per our OORS data during the 2017-2018 school year we submitted 48 behavior infraction reports vs. 33 during the 2016-2017 school year. There is a need to build capacity and develop teachers’ ability to recognize disruptive behavior as social emotional learning opportunities as well as providing both adults and students with access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. There is a need to develop teachers’ knowledge in order to teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, and managing their thinking, behavior and feelings. 2018-19 CEP 25  Currently, we have the Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS) across the school Pre-kindergarten through fifth grade. The PBIS team meet on a regular basis to discuss, plan and implement strategies that would best support our school. Positive incentives such as wolfie bucks, our school rewards store, parent notification forms, incident forms, school mascot, school chant, spirit assemblies are all systems that currently support our PBIS process. Teacher feedback and survey indicate that there is a need to continue strengthening behavior systems currently in place. Although we have no suspensions and our school survey data relates our school is predominantly a safe, welcoming environment teachers are finding that due to a lack of consistent systems there has been an increase in the number of students who are requiring social/emotional behavioral support. Data tracking has made it easier to guide student support and parent meetings when necessary, but there is still a need to work on consistency with parent follow up and following systems being implemented. There needs to be cohesiveness within all classrooms where as infractions/consequences and rewards are defined and normed ensuring all members of our school community are following and aiding the systems being implemented. There is also a need to really get to the root of students behaviors and address the true causes for students infractions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. .By June 2019, 100% of stakeholders ie: leadership, pedagogues, paraprofessionals, staff and partnerships will receive professional development focused on social emotional learning to impact a 10% growth on student academic achievement and a 10% decrease of OORS reports as students social awareness is broadened. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement and SEL learning program All pedagogues Admin PBIS Integrate SEL into academic learning and curricular resources All pedagogues Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS Paraprofessionals Sept 2018 – June 2019 Support Staff Promote the 10 teaching practices of SEL: Social: student centered discipline, teacher language, responsibility and choice, warm and support Paraprofessionals Support Staff All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin , Instructional leader Instructional: cooperative learning, classroom discussions, balanced instruction, self-assessment and self-reflection, academic press and expectations and competency building Provide teachers with professional learning experiences on SEL All pedagogues Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS Paraprofessionals Support Staff Look for instructional practices that promote or support SEL All pedagogues Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS Connect SEL to other school policies and procedures, such as school climate, school vision and mission, or service learning programs. Paraprofessionals Support Staff All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS 2018-19 CEP 27 Use specific instructional strategies and classroom management techniques, including those that foster a supportive caring classroom environment (teacher) Assess use of instructional strategies that support SEL in the classroom Assess students’ social-emotional competencies in the classroom Assess pedagogue and administration social-emotional competencies Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, All pedagogues, PBIS Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff Student All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff Ask for feedback on SEL implementation from administrators, evaluators or peers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Admin Instructional leaders, PBIS All pedagogues Paraprofessionals Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Opportunities will be provided for parents to attend Social Emotional Learning and partake in the same training that the school personnel will be experiencing. It is expected that providing families with the key skills of emotional intelligence they will be better able to support the school while simultaneously creating positive emotional climate at home. The parent coordinator will coordinate with the school PBIS team to lead these sessions with parents alongside administration and support providers ie: Guidance counselor, Mount Sinai Social Worker Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax levy monies will be appropriated to allow for the purchase of a SEL program to implement school wide. Professional Development Monday to roll out phase 1 of SEL program  PBIS team common planning time to plan role out of phase 1 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 Social Emotional Learning surveys will indicate a 30% change in students, pedagogues and administrative responses with regards to their social emotional competencies. A decline in the number of OORS reports being generated from September to January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pre and post teacher SEL surveys Increase in student performance Decrease in OORS reports being generated Student self-regulating their behaviors and emotions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Although data shows that we have made great strides in planning coherent instruction via our data analysis cycles and protocols within our grade level teacher teams as per the 2017-2018 Advance data where it indicates we had a decrease of 3% from 11% to 8% of teachers rating developing in the area of planning coherent instruction and a 4% decrease from 12% to 8% in engaging students in learning the need is for teachers to utilize the skills acquired during school year 2017-2018 around data analysis to effectively continue to aligned student tasks to the standards being addressed. If there is a lack of standard understanding and their progression, then tasks being planned are not a true measure of student performance within standard.  There is also a need of analyzing the New Generation Learning Standards as building blocks vs. isolated grade level standards. We are now targeting our analysis around how NGLS grows as a continuum across grades and within a given grade. There is also the need for teachers to internalize all curriculum areas to be able to bridge content areas within ELA and Math, so that we are maximizing instructional time and students’ ability to cognitively transfer skills and strategies across all content areas. There is also a need for our students to be able to effectively write from sources vs just genre specific and process. Our ANET data shows that although students perform within selected reading standards they have difficulty transferring their comprehension into written form via their responses. Data shows that students have difficulty not only in ELA but also in Mathematics. As a result of the systems put in place over the course of the past two years we have successfully implemented a cycle of practices and processes that facilitate effective teacher teams. As a result, teachers are better at utilizing said structures and processes for collecting, analyzing and interpreting data. This in turn has impacted teacher’s performance in planning coherently, engaging students in learning and therefore, impacting student performance. Public School 83 also takes pride in having created a positive school culture with strong relationships between administration and teaching staff that has yielded a strong sense of community and trust among staff members. We need to utilize this strength to support and promote teachers becoming confident to facilitate the professional learning communities in order to continue building capacity. Currently, we have identified teacher leaders some of who can and will begin to lead their teacher teams, while others still need support and guidance. Another are of strength is teachers being provided with the time to meet on a weekly basis for a double block of time to analyze data and utilize the data to inform instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year, teacher teams will focus on 2018-19 CEP 30  the use of protocols for curriculum internalization and adaptations. Furthermore, within this process teachers will create or modify performance tasks to align with NGLS and the work that will be done with LDC. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 100% of grade level teacher teams will utilize the protocols for internalizing curriculum, text and lessons to effectively adjust and bridge instructional practices maximizing on instructional time while simultaneously attaining to rigor and standards resulting in a 10% increase in student performance on state ELA and Math exams and an 8% decrease of teachers rating developing in the areas of planning coherent instruction and student engagement.  By June 2019, 75% of all students grades K- 5th will demonstrate a minimum of 1 years growth as per the writing progression within the genres of argumentative and informative writing (writing to sources). 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). New PLC’s will meet to begin internalization of curriculum (ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies) to begin with curriculum alignment and pacing of lessons. PLC’s will continue to meet regularly to norm using rubrics and exemplars, analyze student work and make adjustments/revisions to curriculum, program and practices to ensure coherent instruction across teams Teachers will use school-wide protocols in collaborative teacher teams to assess the rigor of instructional tasks in units and within lesson plans. Teacher teams will use the Depth of Knowledge Matrix to assess that tasks are focusing on Level 3 and 4 skills of the Depth of Knowledge. Administration will conduct informal observations of PLC sessions with actionable feedback aligned to Domain 1 and Domain 4 of the framework. All grade level teams Sept. 2018 Grade level teams to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to Pre-K to 5 Paraprofessionals June 2019 Grade teams Sept. 2018 Targeted teachers to Data specialist June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional leader, grade team leaders Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional leader, teacher team leaders Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional leader Grade teams Sept. 2018 Administration Targeted teachers Data specialist to Grade Leaders June 2019 Classroom teachers Grade level and vertical grade walk-throughs for the purpose of observing instructional practices to gather evidence to determine patterns and trends in both teacher practice and student learning as per the aligned curriculum, planned lessons and student need Instructional support specialist Consultants PLC’s will meet on a monthly basis during Monday and Tuesdays Professional Development Sessions focused on LDC practices and Hunter College Literacy initiative Grade teams Sept. 2018 Administration Targeted teachers to Grade Leaders June 2019 Classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 32 Data specialist Instructional support leaders Instructional support specialist Consultants Grades 3rd thru 5th will participate in LDC Zoom sessions and in live sessions with consultant to craft units that go hand in hand with units being taught and to craft rigorous tasks. 3rd thru 5th teacher teams Sept. 2018 Administration to Grade Leaders 3rd thru 5th instructional support leaders June 2019 Classroom teachers Instructional support specialist Consultants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to “Curriculum Night” in the beginning of the year to provide them with information and resources on ways to help their children meet the needs of the curriculum, grade specific standards and Citywide Instructional Expectations. The various channels of communication will be shared at this time. The school's instructional goals will also be discussed Open School Day twice a month where parents have the opportunity to engage in their child's daily instructional schedule. Parents acquire strategies that can be implemented at home with children to facilitate students’ achievement with rigorous tasks. Parents are provided tools to assist with the implementation of these strategies around literacy and math ie: technology access for Eureka Math, Reading comprehension question stems, word work strategies, etc.. Parent workshops in six week cycles focused on the Common Core Learning standards will be provided by teachers and the Learning Leadership Organization. The ENL teachers will conduct workshops with parents to address the needs of English language learners. The upper grade science teacher will familiarize parents with our FOSS experiments and NYS science exam and how to support their children. The Math Instructional Leader/ Century 21 providers / City Year will conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI) 2018-19 CEP 33  United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Parent Engagement on Tuesdays is used to inform parents of student progress and strategies they can use to support their children in all areas of need in reading. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy monies will be appropriated to allow for hiring consultants for professional development. Schedule adjustment will be made to accommodate inter-visitations to other schools and district PD sessions. Title I School Wide Programs will be appropriated to purchase resource materials to support professional development plan. i.e. professional readings, consultants, external workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 100% of grade teams will have internalized curriculum and blended the content areas, rigorous tasks and technology using protocols. By January 2019 100% of teachers will have an minimum increase of % in the year to date rating. By January 2019 75% of students will demonstrate a minimum of a ½ years growth on their writing based on their entry point as per the writing progressions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric during PLC sessions and classroom visitations Student data supporting teacher short term goals presented during one on one conferences ie: running records, writing rubrics, math exemplar rubric Instructional plans that align to levels 3 and 4 of the Hess Matrix ANET interim assessment itemized data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in the area of Effective School Leadership we had a .53% increase from the prior school year rating at 4.25 compared to 3.72 we attribute this growth to:  As a result of the systems put in place over the course of the past two years we have successfully implemented a cycle of practices and processes that facilitate effective teacher teams. As a result of these professional learning opportunities, teachers are better at utilizing said structures and processes for collecting, analyzing and interpreting data. This in turn has impacted teacher’s performance in planning coherently, engaging students in learning and therefore, impacting student performance.   Public School 83 also takes pride in having created a positive school culture with strong relationships between administration and teaching staff that has yielded a strong sense of community and trust among staff members. We need to utilize this strength to support and promote teachers becoming confident to facilitate the professional learning communities in order to continue building capacity. Currently, we have identified teacher leaders some of who can and will begin to lead their teacher teams, while others still need support and guidance.   Another area of strength is teachers being provided with the time to meet on a weekly basis for a double block of time to work collaboratively at analyzing data and utilizing the data to inform instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year, teacher teams will focus on the use of protocols for curriculum internalization and adaptations. Furthermore, within this process teachers will have the opportunity create or modify performance tasks to align with NGLS and the work that will be done with LDC as well share best practices.   During the 2017-2018 school year we were fortunate to be able to send teachers to attend professional development in areas of interest and need ie: Wilson, Fundations, Passport, New Generation Learning Standards, Read East Harlem Initiative professional learning. In regards to priority need, although we have system in place for addressing positive behaviors such as: Character Counts, Principal book of the month focusing on different pillars of Character Education, Spirit Week, positive behavior rewards systems the greatest need is in developing the whole child at a deeper emotional and social level. During the 2017-2018 school year 85 reports were generated into OORS of which 56.5 % were behavior and/or emotionally related. It is evident that as a school community we need to devote time to develop school leadership, teachers and all stakeholders in habits of mind, emotional literacy and knowledge of social skills in order to successfully implement social emotional learning. Another area of need is in ensuring equity and access for all. We need to be able to guarantee that all students regardless of gender, race, disabilities, social- economics are able to receive targeted academic support, supplemental program supports, clinical supports, and a curriculum that is consistent, cohesive, well-articulated, and differentiated. 2018-19 CEP 35  With these solid structures in place we will be able to facilitate entry points for the academic and social emotional success for all students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of stakeholders ie: leadership, pedagogues, paraprofessionals, staff and partnerships will receive professional development focused on social emotional learning to impact a 10% growth on student academic achievement and a 10% decrease of OORS reports as students social awareness is broadened. By June 2019, 100% of school leaders, pedagogues and staff will participate in professional development focusing on understanding the causes of inequities and researching best practices with regards to equity and diversity management in order to increase student progress and performance school wide with a particular focus on sub-populations as evidenced by 50% these students meeting or exceeding our universal data source benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement an SEL learning program All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration Community Schools support staff to June 2019 Staff Paraprofessionals Students Integrate SEL into academic learning and curricular resources All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration Integrate SEL into academic learning and curricular resources All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration Administration to Teachers Instructional leaders June 2019 Lead Facilitators Provide teacher with professional learning experiences with SEL and Equity and Access for all Identify instructional practices and promote and support SEL and Equity and Access for all paraprofessionals to Teachers June 2019 Lead Facilitators Sept. 2018 Administration to Teachers June 2019 Lead Facilitators All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration Paraprofessionals to Teachers Community schools support staff June 2019 Lead Facilitators Conduct a book study for Equity and Access All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration 2018-19 CEP 37 Connect SEL to other school policies and procedures ie: school climate, school vision and mission and service learning programs paraprofessionals to Teachers June 2019 Lead Facilitators All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration Parent coordinator to Teachers June 2019 Lead Facilitators Teachers will incorporate Danielson best practices within All pedagogues Sept. 2018 Administration common core aligned revised curriculum with specific to Teachers strategies to meet the needs of subgroups including June 2019 Lead Facilitators English language learners, special education. strategies to meet the needs of subgroups including English language learners, special education. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to “Curriculum Night” in the beginning of the year to provide them with information and resources on ways to help their children meet their social and emotional needs facilitating access to the curriculum, grade specific standards and Citywide Instructional Expectations. The various channels of communication will be shared at this time. The school's instructional goals will also be discussed explaining how SEL will support students academic and social emotional achievement. Open School Day twice a month where parents have the opportunity to engage in their child's daily instructional schedule. Parents acquire strategies that can be implemented at home with children to facilitate students’ achievement with rigorous tasks along with strategies for social emotional development. Parents will be provided tools to assist with the implementation of SEL strategies that will support the rigor within literacy and math ie: technology access for Eureka Math, Reading comprehension question stems, word work strategies, stress management, time management, acquiring language to express emotions, etc… Service Providers will provide on-site professional learning opportunities for parents in all areas of support services. Community Schools support staff providing avenues for additional supports outside of school environment and supports within school environment during and after school. 21st century forum 2x a year 2018-19 CEP 38  The Math Instructional Leader/ Century 21 providers / City Year will conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI) United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Parent Engagement on Tuesdays is used to inform parents of student progress and strategies they can use to support their children in all areas of need in reading. Parents who are members of SLT will be provided with opportunities to share out to our parent community during Parent Teacher Association meetings the work that is being done with regards to SEL and Access and Equity for all. Parent coordinator will facilitate workshops in the area of SEL Parents will be afforded opportunities to receive services from licensed professionals in the area of emotional and social support. Parent workshops in six week cycles focused on the Common Core Learning standards will be provided by teachers and the Learning Leadership Organization. The ENL teachers will conduct workshops with parents to address the needs of English language learners. The upper grade science teacher will familiarize parents with the NYS science exam and how to support their children. The Math Instructional Specialist/ Century 21 providers / City Year will conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI) United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Parent Engagement on Tuesdays is used to inform parents of student progress and strategies they can use to support their children in all areas of need in reading. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy monies will be appropriated to allow for hiring consultants for professional development. Schedule adjustment will be made to accommodate common grade planning time and the educational retreat. Title I School Wide Programs will be appropriated to purchase resource materials to support professional development plan. i.e. professional readings, consultants, external workshops. Monies will be allocated to support per session planning opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a blueprint of schoolwide SEL practices will be created and implemented impacting a decrease of 5% of OORS report being inputted in the system. By January 2019, 100% of school leaders, pedagogues and staff will have participated in a complete book study focusing on understanding the causes of inequities and implementing best practices with regards to equity and diversity management as evidenced classroom observations and performance of sub populations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent feedback via survey Cohesive SEL strategies being implemented across all grade Attendance at professional development opportunities parents and teachers Teacher pre and post surveys Sub population student progress from pre to post data across all instructional areas. 2018-19 CEP 40  Student reflections Decrease in OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Public School 83’s strengths in the element of Strong Family and Community ties are numerous and strong. Our school has successfully created an environment where families feel welcomed and supported. We maintain an open door policy where families know they can come to our school on any day or time and they will be supported. Our parent coordinator has been instrumental at ensuring that all parents are kept abreast with school information as monthly calendars are sent home both electronically via schoolCNXT and hard copy. Our parent coordinator has also been instrumental in working side by side with our Parent Teacher Executive board in planning events and workshops to support parents with their children’s academic needs. During the 2017-2018 school year we were able to create a wellness committee and host weekly sessions with Buen Provecho to promote healthy habits at home as well as in school. Our parent coordinator is also very active in bringing in services from the community to support our parents as well as our students. During special events such as multicultural celebration in November and our holiday celebration in December our parents are very active. They support us with their services from cooking, setup, gift wrapping, monetary contributions from PTA funds to ensure that all kids and families are acknowledged and provided with opportunities that they would not otherwise have. Via our open school house 2x a month on Tuesday’s, our classroom doors are opened for all parents to attend and take part in their child/children’s learning. During this time parents are able to see and engage with their children in different areas of the curriculum. This affords parents with opportunity to learn alongside their children the strategies and classroom practices being used by teachers so the transference can continue at home. We have also established a partnership with Museo Del Barrio and New York City Soccer for Success NYCFC and Road Runners Girls on the Run which affords opportunities for our students to engage in the arts and sports during and after school. Considering all the above, we find that our greatest need is in engaging working families. While the current systems are enhancing parent communication and understanding of curriculum data shows that the % of parents who attend services provided are non-working parents. We have attempted to address the working parent population but data shows that when evening sessions are embedded parent participation is low due to their many responsibilities. It is our goal to continue strengthening and supporting strong partnerships with families and community based organizations to engage them as partners, keeping them abreast and actively involved in the day to day functions of our school community. We aim to not only inform them, but also include them via hands on learning opportunities of the systems and practices that our teachers and students undergo in ensuring the success of all. They include: parent engagement and involvement, in conjunction with the Parent Teacher Association and School Leadership Team, we have established parent/family symposiums. This is becoming one of our strengths in engaging parents. These symposiums include: Back to School, Meet the Teacher Curriculum Night, Parent workshops, Anti-2018-19 CEP 42  Bullying workshop, monthly CCSS Math & Reading Workshop, Family Pajama Party Reading Night, Family Math Game Show Night, Spring Carnival and El Museo Del Barrio. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will engage parents with alternative learning opportunities that will enhance our partnership as measured by a 20 % increase in attendance at parental engagement and school-wide instructional activities based on PCAR data. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Parent Survey will be created to generate parent interest, availability and feedback Parents will be provided with copies of the following: Parent Handbook; NYCDOE Calendar for 2018-2019; NYCDOE Family Guide; NYCDOE Discipline Code in language of preference Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Time-line What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018 to Administration All parents June 2019 Parent Coordinator guardians PTA SLT Sept. 2018 Administration All parents to Parent Coordinator guardians June 2019 School Leadership Team PTA All parents will be provided with the Title I Parent Involvement Plan and Parent Compact in language of preference. All parents Sept. 2018 Administration All flyers, letters, curriculum materials, will be translated in language of preference. A survey in the beginning of the year will be sent home for parents to communicate language of preference. guardians to Parent Coordinator June 2019 School Leadership Team All parents Sept. 2018 Administration PTA guardians to Parent Coordinator June 2019 School Leadership Team PTA 2018-19 CEP 44  Parent newsletter and Monthly Parent Calendar highlight all school wide events ie. Parent notification letters, Fliers. Parent Teacher Association monthly meetings, Parent Teacher Association monthly executive board meetings, School wide website, Messaging system, CBO workshops/meetings and Parent/classroom visits School CNXT will be used to call parents to notify them that their child was late or absent, to inform them about meetings, activities, workshops, art exhibitions, performances and celebrations Bulletin Board outside the building highlighting all school events on a monthly basis. As you enter the school building there will be another parent bulletin board with copies of the Learning Environment Survey, Quality Review, the NYSED Accountability report, monthly curriculum calendars, a copy of the monthly activities calendar and the School Leadership Team minutes and any other information to keep parents informed All parents guardians Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator SLt PTA All parents Sept. 2018 Administration guardians to Parent Coordinator June 2019 SLt PTA All parents Sept. 2018 Administration guardians to Parent Coordinator June 2019 SLt PTA Open School Tuesdays and Curriculum Night All parents Oct.. 2018 Administration guardians to Teachers June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parents will be provided with monthly progress reports for students within the bottom 1/3 of the class and for students on grade level they will receive on the following months December 2018; January 2019; February 2019 and April 2019 All parents Sept. 2018 Administration guardians to Parent Coordinator Parent’s literacy Club Parent Math Club Providing materials and host workshops to help families understand academic content standards and literacy/math-related benchmarks appropriate to their child’s age.  Next Generation Learning Standards in math and literacy  Fountas and Pinnel benchmarks  English Language Learners  Foss Science June 2019 SLt PTA All parents Sept. 2018 Administration guardians to Parent Coordinator June 2019 Classroom teachers Parent Teacher Association Community Based Organizations 2018-19 CEP 45   Eureka Math & Exemplars  Passport Social Studies Parent certificates will be distributed for completion of “course” presented at our scheduled awards ceremonies Parent office hours will be scheduled to meet with instructional specialists Provide parents of targeted students with individualized scheduled appointments to meet with instructional leaders/data specialist Monthly progress reports for bottom 1/3, English Language Learner’s and Students with Disabilities will be sent home to parents. Student led Conferences driven by a portfolio 4x a year. Coffee with the Principal Parent Involvement Activities Pre-Kindergarten & Kindergarten Open Houses Pre-Kindergarten & Kindergarten Orientation Book Fairs Buen Porvecho Breakfast Program Multi-Cultural Festival Mother’s & Father’s Day Breakfast Holiday Elves Program 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. El Museo Del Barrio Parent Workshops District Wide parent workshops across all the disciplines 2018-19 CEP 46  Parents will be invited to “Curriculum Night” in the beginning of the year to provide them with information and resources on ways to help their children meet the needs of the curriculum, grade specific standards and Citywide Instructional Expectations. The various channels of communication will be shared at this time. The school's instructional goals will also be discussed Open School Day twice a month where parents have the opportunity to engage in their child's daily instructional schedule. Parents acquire strategies that can be implemented and home with children. Parents are provided tools to assist with the implementation of these strategies around literacy. Community Schools 21st Century support staff Buen Provecho Mt. Sinai Clinic . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy monies will be appropriated to allow translation services, printing supplies, and maintenance of website. Schedule adjustment will be made to accommodate teacher participation at monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings. Title I School Wide Programs will be appropriated to purchase resource materials to support parental workshops and the school-wide messaging system. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Copies of the parent engagement signature sheets are collected at the end of each month by the parent coordinator. A tally of how many parents have participated in extended day Tuesday is done and compared from one month to the next. In addition, parent signature sheets for other school wide events are also collected and tallied to compare and determine at what types of events do we notice the most parent participation. By February it is expected that signature tallies will have increased by a minimum of 10 % Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent signature sheets NYC Surveys Student and teacher feedback Parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group differentiated instruction targeted to meet the specific needs of individual students by classroom teachers Reading Rescue: One on one tutoring Program for “at risk” students. Classroom teachers provide targeted small group or one on one math interventions to “at risk” students. Math instruction is differentiated based on student needs All “at risk” students are provided with small group differentiated instruction one on one tutoring to target each student’s specific needs During school day After school day During school day After school day During school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have not reached the beginning of the year, middle of the year or end of the year grade level benchmarks in reading will receive a reading intervention Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, independent reading shared reading, read alouds , shared writing, guided writing will be used to support at risk students in reading Mathematics Level 1 on NYS math Level 1 performance on end of unit performance tasks The ECAM , assessments, pre and post unit assessments and the Exemplars Performance tasks are used to identify “at risk” student s Science PS 83’s science program is inquiry based and is aligned to the Standards and the NYC Science Students are provided with differentiated tasks to support their needs. Number talks Investigations Problem-solving approach with manipulative 2018-19 CEP 49 Any student identified as “at risk” in science is provided with small group via All “at risk” students are provided with small group differentiated  Scope and Sequence. the NYC Science Scope and Sequence. Students are identified as “at risk” in science based on the end of unit assessments Level 1 on NYS science Level 1 on end of unit tasks as per common core aligned rubric PS 83’s Social Studies Program is Standards Based. The NYCDOE Scope and Sequence is used for the social studies inquiry based units of study. Social Studies Passport Program Social Studies instruction one on one to target each student’s specific needs. Students are identified as “at risk” in science based on the end of unit assessments During school day Any student identified as “at risk” in social studies is provided with small group instruction and more opportunities to participate in hands on activities targeted to meet their identified needs All “at risk” students are provided with small group differentiated instruction; one on one tutoring to target each student’s specific needs. Level 1 on end of unit tasks as per common core aligned rubric ELA based instructional strategies following scope and sequence At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PS 83 has a social worker via the Mount Sinai Health Clinic and our guidance counselor supports students who are identified as “at risk.” PBIS data Non-fiction strategies including note taking and use of graphic organizers Students who are identified as “at risk” by teachers are provided with small group or one on one services. The School Intervention Team monitors the “at risk” intervention to determine its effectiveness. Student performance on school wide tasks and state/city assessments Problem-based literature discussion, individual counseling During school day At risk students are provided with small group or individual support by the social worker/guidance counselor 2018-19 CEP 50  Parent/teacher recommendation 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Presently we have 13 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Identify homeless children and youth (NYC public schools use the “Residency Questionnaire” to identify the STH population) •Ensure students enroll in and have a full and equal opportunity to succeed in school •Inform homeless families about the McKinney-Vento Act •Disseminate McKinney-Vento posters in schools, shelters, etc. •Arrange transportation (yellow bus or MetroCards in NYC) •Assist students with immediate enrollment, even if they do not have: 1) school records, 2) medical records/immunizations; 3) proof of residency; 4) guardianship papers; 5) birth certificates or other documents normally needed •Assist students with tutoring and related support services, free school lunch, Special Education, school supplies and Summer Programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). None 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 52  None 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. None 2018-19 CEP 53  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers to the system-wide approaches for English Language Arts and mathematics and implementation strategies for curriculum, instruction and assessment. Team Leaders provide support for new teachers with regard to grade level initiatives, collaborative inquiry, data analysis and curriculum maps. Instructional Coach provides support for new teachers through weekly conferences and classroom support. Administrative staff provides support and resources to assist new and veteran teachers with implementation of Danielson ‘Framework for Effective Teaching’ and Instructional Expectations from the Department of Education. Consultants support newly hired and veteran teachers with implementation of rigorous curriculum through professional development including Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and differentiated instructional strategies. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified classroom teachers and specialists. 2018-19 CEP 54  Administrative staff works closely with Human Resources to ensure that all staff members meet required documentation and assessment deadlines Teacher and para educator assignments is done via preference sheets that are distributed In May. Most of the time teachers are assigned their first preference. In situations where administration would like to strategically assign staff to determined positions, conversations are held with teachers expressing administrative interest. Our open door policy, our genuine concern for teacher well- being, our belief in the family unit, our constant show of appreciation via luncheons, breakfast, teacher recognition, shout outs, thank you notes, have all contributed to building a community where teacher retention is high. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are encouraged to attend DOE professional development opportunities supporting curriculum and instruction All teachers and paraprofessionals participate in weekly differentiated professional development opportunities based on identified area of need, school goals, professional goals, etc.. Administration attends professional development sessions offered by District Superintendent and DOE initiatives Classroom teachers meet monthly with administration to review class/student data to analyze student progress (individual, class, subgroups.) All teachers and support specialist are provided with ongoing support with consultants. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Collaborations have been established with neighborhood pre-school programs where their teachers visit our school to observe our daily teaching practices. The parent coordinator also visits these programs to provide information to the parents about our school. Parents are also offered the opportunity to take a tour of our school, and are allowed to sit in a kindergarten classroom to observe the daily routines and expectations. Upon scheduled appointments scheduling is adjusted making Kindergarten teachers available to answer any questions regarding our instructional program. In addition, the school offers support to assist parents in making the transition from a pre-school setting into an elementary school setting. The parent coordinator is available to assist parents in this endeavor. During the summer 2018-19 CEP 56  before the new school year begins administration hosts a Pre- Kindergarten and kindergarten orientation where an overview and expectations are provided. At this time parents are provided with an informational packet, summer reading titles and samples of work to support the transition from home to Pre-Kindergarten and pre-school into Kindergarten. Having a Pre-Kindergarten program in our school also affords us the opportunity for our Pre-Kindergarten teacher to sit with our Kindergarten team during common grade meetings and professional development to discuss how the Pre-Kindergarten curriculum supports students in preparation for the upcoming school year and analyze student work and what is required of the students to meet the grade expected standards. It is expected that the Pre-Kindergarten teacher visit our Kindergarten classrooms and observe the methodologies being implemented as well as the curriculum being taught. It is expected that via this method of professional development the Pre-Kindergarten teacher will be able to prepare students for the transition into our Kindergarten classes. Furthermore, with a clear perception of the expectations for Kindergarten, the Pre-K teacher can provide the additional academic support for identified students who may be delayed. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessments are developed based on teacher input during teacher grade level team meetings and vertical grade meetings. Throughout the school year as assessments are administered, analyzed against Common Core Learning Standard, school wide goals and curriculum objectives, modifications are made to the assessment calendar. Common grade meetings and extended day Monday and Tuesday provide time to really examine and discuss trends and needs as per the data from these assessments. This time is also used to develop teachers on how to look at summative and formative data and the implications for instruction. 2018-19 CEP 57  Teachers meet in grade level teams and cross functional teams to review student data gathered from running records, interim assessments, city and state assessments, portfolio assessment and performance-based assessments. Teachers in grades K-5 administer running records and expect each student to increase a minimum of one reading level by January. Grade level teams work collaboratively to develop common performance-based assessments for each unit of study. Teachers participate in ‘Learning Walks’ to observe colleagues with implementation of Danielson Framework. Teachers participate with inter-visitations with regard to implementation of best practices. Teachers have option to select formal/informal observation format with teacher evaluation process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 58  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 282,488.00 145,958.00 12, 366.00 0 2,678,430.00 x x x 0 x 5a, 5c, 5d, n/a 5a, 5C, 5D, 5E 0 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5E, 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 2018-19 CEP 59  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 60  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Public school 83 Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy 2018-2019 Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 83, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Public School 83 SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT Public School 83 will support parents and families of all of our student as we are a School-wide Title I school by: 2018-19 CEP 61  - providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; - providing parents with training and resources in the areas of social and emotional development - providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; - fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; - providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessment - sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand -providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community;   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the ComprehensiveEducational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 2018-19 CEP 62  ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: Literacy Workshops- Reading and Writing, Mathematics by grade band specific, parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Develop online resources for parents to engage students in the home  A Parent Survey will be created to generate parent interest, availability and feedback  Scheduling of workshop/course cycles ie: fitness, technology, instruction, General Education Diploma, English As a Second Language 2018-19 CEP 63   Parent certificates will be distributed for completion of “course” presented at our scheduled awards ceremonies  Creation of a School website for parents to utilize as an additional medium for parent/teacher communication  Parent office hours will be scheduled to meet with instructional specialists  Provide parents of targeted students with individualized scheduled appointments to meet with instructional leaders/data specialist  Monthly progress reports for bottom 1/3, English Language Learner’s and Students with Disabilities will be sent home to parents. Student led Conferences driven by a portfolio 4x a year   Participation in extended day community based programs such as Concrete Safari and City Year  Parent newsletter  Monthly Parent Calendar highlight all school wide events  Parent Handbook  Pre-Kindergarten Handbook  Parent notification letters  Understanding Your Child's Reading Levels   Parent Teacher Association Meetings  Parent Teacher Association Executive Meetings   CBO Meetings and Workshops  Messaging System  Parent Classroom visits School-Wide Website Fliers School-Parent Compact (SPC) Our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA).. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 64  ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing school programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; ● Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 65  ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, i.e. School or District Leadership Committees ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 66  Student Responsibilities: ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Remember to wear school uniform each day; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other students and adults; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. ● Parent Signature: ____________________________ Student Signature: ________________________ Date: _________________________________ 2018-19 CEP 67  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The community school model at PS83 will expand after-school programming and deepen the work of CBO partners in the building, including City Year and Arts For Kids. City Year’s after-school programming, which serves grades 3-5, will now offer programming five days per week, providing additional homework help, as well as enrichment activities. Arts for Kids and two City Year Academic Enrichment Specialists will serve grades 2 and below to offer enrichment activities that engage students and support learning. Through City Year’s in-school and after-school service, the organization will support the development of students in the core areas of attendance, behavior, and course performance — leveraging data to target the right students at the right time. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 Out-of-school time services will be provided to 200 students as evidenced by students applications and program rosters. By June 65% of these students will complete at least 90 hours of programming as evidenced by attendance records. By june 2019 School attendance rates will be 90% or above for participants as evidenced by Department of Education ATS records. By June 2019 75% of participants will self-report improved peer relationships and sense of self as evidenced by pre and post surveys. 2018-19 CEP 68  By June 2019 65% of participants will show improved classroom behavior reported by teachers as evidenced by behavior logs, and behavior monitoring record keeping. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Research from Johns Hopkins University indicates that students who are off-track with respect to attendance, behavior, and/or course performance in math in literacy are significantly less likely to complete their education than their peers who are on-track. City Year’s AmeriCorps member are trained to provide rigorous interventions to students who are struggling in each of these areas to, in coordination with school stakeholders, help bring students back on track. Accordingly teams provide: attendance coaching, SEL/Behavior mentoring, ELA and Math tutoring, and afterschool programming. These interventions align with 04M083’s 2018 Comprehensive Education Plan, which highlights increased achievement for students in ELA and math performance, as well as a focus on student SEL Development Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership City Year City Year Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 3rd-5th Grade Students, who are chronically absent Attendance Supports Success Mentors 3rd-5th Grade Students, whom teachers recommend for additional mentoring SEL/ Behavioral Support SEL/Behavioral Mentoring AmeriCorps members will target 27 students who are chronically absent, providing 70% at least 8 consecutive weeks of coaching, with 60% of that cohort increasing their attendance by at least 2 ADA points. Ameri-Corps members will target 27 students who are off-track, providing 70% at least 8 consecutive weeks of mentoring, with 60% of that cohort 2018-19 CEP 69  City Year City Year ELA Interventions ELA Tutoring Math Interventions Math Tutoring 3rd-5th Grade Students, who are behind grade level based on Scholastic Reading Inventory Assessment (administered in the fall/Spring 3rd-5th Grade Students, who are behind grade level based on Scholastic Math Inventory Assessment (administered in the fall/Spring. improving on the DESSA. Ameri-Corps members will target 36 students who are off-track, providing 70% at least 8 consecutive weeks of tutoring, with 60% of that cohort improving on the Scholastic Reading Inventory. Ameri-Corps members will target 36 students who are off-track, providing 70% at least 8 consecutive weeks of tutoring, with 60% of that cohort improving on the Scholastic Math Inventory. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The CSD will build upon the network built in year one to ensure success in the above listed SMART goals. Through relationships developed with community partners (including but not limited to the Department of Education, Department of Health, Mt. Sinai, multiple nonprofit organizations, and corporate partners), the City Year CSD will continue to seek resources that meet the needs of Public School 83 families, and work to support Public School 83’s goals. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 CEP 70 Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. The Community Schools Director, Jahna Orzano, will continue to collaborate with the leadership of PS83 wand will work closely with the school community, sitting on the leadership team and working to coordinate the services of partnering CBOs within the building, and will bring in additional resources and oversee implementation and quality of services. 2. After-school programming is a central aspect of the Community School partnership at PS83. Through these services, City Year will provide programming five days per week over the course of the school year to serve students in grades 3-5. The Leadership Program will serve student in grades 2 and below in collaboration with teacher paid through the school’s allocation from the 21CCLC grant. City Year’s after-school will be seamlessly coordinated with in school services, as City Year Ameri-Corps members are present in the school building throughout the school day, and often present in ELA or math classrooms to increase their awareness of curricula and student need. Thus they are aware of the lesson content students experience and can coordinate with after-school programming. 3. PS83 maintains a robust system for engaging parents and family members of students. The following list includes many of the opportunities for such engagement: City Year CSD will plan and lead parent focus groups and forums to gather parent feedback multiple times throughout the year. El Museo Del Barrio Parent Workshops: District Wide parent workshops across all the disciplines Parents will be invited to “Curriculum Night” in the beginning of the year to provide them with information and resources on ways to help their children meet the needs of the curriculum, grade specific standards and Citywide Instructional Expectations. The various 2018-19 CEP 71  channels of communication will be shared at this time. The school's instructional goals will also be discussed Open School Day twice a month where parents have the opportunity to engage in their child's daily instructional schedule. Parents acquire strategies that can be implemented and home with children. Parents are provided tools to assist with the implementation of these strategies around literacy. Parent workshops in six week cycles focused on the Common Core Learning standards will be provided by teachers and the Learning Leadership Organization. The ENL teachers will conduct workshops with parents to address the needs of English language learners. The upper grade science teacher will familiarize parents with the NYS science exam and how to support their children. The Math Coach/ Century 21 providers / City Yearwill conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI) United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Parent Engagement on Tuesdays is used to inform parents of student progress and strategies they can use to support their children in all areas of need in reading. . Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP 72  As a standard aspect of City Year’s service model, school-based staff meet with principals and other school leaders on a weekly basis to review data and align the services of the City Year team with the needs of the school community. Once training for the New Visions tool is provided, the CSD will coordinate with school stakeholders to ensure that this aspect of the work is implemented. As a standard aspect of City Years’ service model, school-based staff meet with principals and other school leaders on a weekly basis to review data and align the services of the City Year team with the needs of the school community. Once training for the New Visions tool is provided, the CSD will coordinate with school stakeholders to ensure that this aspect of the work is implemented. City Year will deploy 12 full-time AmeriCorps members to provide direct service within the school that is aligned with the goals mentioned above. City Year will also employ a Community School Director, an Impact Manager who is responsible for managing the City Year team and services in school and after school, and two part time staff who will be responsible for first and second grade academic enrichment programing. Once service has begun at the school, the CDS will work with school stakeholders to determine the appropriate Community School Team and to structure meetings in a productive manner. The team will collaborate around the appropriate data tools, employing practices that City Year implements regularly to target its services to those students most in need of them. This includes using data to identify who is off-track in attendance, behavior, and course performance and targeting services appropriately. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. City Year will continue to attend trainings to align the goals and service of the CSD with the goals of the program. This includes trainings on 21CCLC data systems, the New Visions data tool, and general trainings to support a high-quality program model. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. City Year’s CSD is already employed, and will enter her second year in this position. The City Year team will begin its service starting on August 13, 2018, whereupon they will undergo a rigorous training period to prepare them for service. They will begin on the first day of school, and continue to serve over the course of the year until early June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-19 CEP 74  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 75  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on our data from the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT it was decided by the LAP committee to utilize Title III funds allocated for the 2018-2019 year to provide ELL students with an after school program. Data shows that out of 41 ELL students there is a need to support new incoming students through out the grades and returning students entering the second grade. According to our 2018 NYSESLAT data there are 10 students in the first grade of which there are 2 students at the entering level, 2 students at the emerging level, 3 students at the transitioning level, and 4 students at the expanding level. In second grade there are 8 students. One student is at the emerging level, 2 at the transitioning level, and 5 at the expanding level. In upper grades, three through 5, we have 16 ELLs of which 3 are at the entering level, 4 are the the transitioning level, while 9 are at the expanding level. Data indicates that the greatest areas of need is vocabulary and writing. The bulk of students in need of Title III services range within the first and second grades. Therefore, our Title III program will support the students in these grades. The program will be instructed in English by a highly qualified teachers with a K-5 Common Branch license. Language acquisition will be facilitated through an interdisciplinary approach with an emphasis on the content areas of the arts and social studies supported by writing. The Title III program will be held 2x a week for two hours each day on Wednesdays and Thursdays projected to begin on Wednesday, November 7, 2018 and will culminate by the end of May. The program is designed to develop English proficiency and is only for our ELL students and will be taught in English. There will be a total of 53 sessions for the year based on the start date. The program will begin at 2:45pm and end at 4:30pm. For students who also participate in City Year, they will go directly to the program after the ELL Title 3 program. They will be attending the enrichment segment of City Year. We will utilize a multidisciplinary approach designed to help students acquire social and academic language skills through content-based instruction in the arts and Reader's Theater utilizing a standards-based fluency program. These approaches will afford the students the opportunity to experience the English language through technology, drama, dialogue, visual and tactile activities, vocabulary development, and choral reading. These varied strategies will assist in meeting the four modalities of language in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. By utilizing varied teaching approaches, students will feel less inhibited in speaking, reading and writing the English Language. In addition, all ELLs throughout the grades will focus on language acquisition via a phonics/phonological program. Furthermore, students will also have the opportunity to work in small groups and engage in center activities such as listening centers, word games, partner reading and guided reading and technology. Teachers will also utilize Q-Tel strategies during their literacy block to assist students especially our ENL population. The technology Smarty Ants Reading World program will provide explicit, systematic instruction centered in the six essential pillars of reading: phonological awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, spelling and reading comprehension for all students. The program will follow a schedule of two days each week. Day 1 will include vocabulary development, word work, phonics/phonemic awareness, reading comprehension development 2018-19 CEP 76  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and writing. A focus on expanding sentences and using varied vocabulary will be taught using the Writing is Thinking methodologies. Day 2 will include the arts portion of the program. Day 2 will include a deep study of art in our world. This will include the arts (literature, television, and theater) art history, analyzing artwork, producing artwork, and studying cultural and local artists in East Harlem. Each student will produce multiple pieces of artwork that include research, art experimentation, booklets, questionnaires, and interviews. As part of the program, students will take local walking trips in East Harlem to study murals , parks, and architecture. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development is provided by school pedagogues who have demonstrated effective to highly effective teaching practices, community learning support personnel, and other organizations such as Hunter College Literacy Professors. In addition Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL with WESTED) professional development provided our teachers principle and practical approaches for effectively teaching the conceptual understandings, academic practices, and language that are critical to ensuring that English language learners achieve 21st century success. These Q-Tel strategies offer a coherent and comprehensive approach to building educators’ expertise in order to address the needs of English language learners. Through the professional development series offered in August and September 2017 teachers have been able to: •Build on the strengths all students possess to realize their potential •Simultaneously develop conceptual, analytic, and language practices in deep and accelerated ways •Use research-based tools and processes to design high-challenge, high-support instruction incorporating well-scaffold lessons that provide multiple entry points for the diversity of English language learners Structure quality interactions that promote language development, problem solving, and collaboration •Develop students’ metacognitive and metalinguistic knowledge to support the development of academic literacies For the 2018-2019 school year teachers will continue to participate in professional development opportunities around Q-Tel Strategies. They will also have professional development in the Writing is Thinking program. These strategies will be demonstrated during our professional development led by the ENL teacher (Monica Lehmann-Gonzalez) and the K-2 Literacy Coach (Kevin Cramer). The school will also be using the WIT model to participate in an inquiry group that supports ELLs in expanding their writing. In addition, the ENL teacher will also participate in professional development provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support throughout the year. The ENL teacher will turnkey information learned to the entire school community during Extended Monday Professional Learning time. 2018-19 CEP 77  Part C: Professional Development In addition, our Title III teacher will also participate in an Inquiry study with our ELL PLC once a month on the third Tuesday of every month. During this time all teachers supporting ELL students will meet to engage in a book study Cultivating Knowledge Building Language Instruction. These teachers will also utilize one of their Professional Preps a month to conduct inter-visitations to observe methodologies implemented to support the ELL's. They will observe how the classroom teacher provides for multiple means of representation, action, expression, and engagement as a means of sharing best practices to better support our ENL learners. It is our intent to incorporate professional development on how to address, support and meet the needs of ELL students within a monolingual classroom setting. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement in our school, including parents of ELLs, is a key component of our planning each year. In brainstorming how to increase parent and community participation for our Title III and all English as a New Language Learner parents, our school community hosts monthly workshops during the school day supporting parents with topics such as: New York State ELA and Math Testing mandates and regulations provided by our Reading and Math Specialist. Understanding the NYSESLAT provided by our ENL teacher and The Road Map for English Language Learners provided by the ENL teacher and parent coordinator. In addition, parents are invited to join their children's classes twice a month on a Tuesday morning where they have the opportunity to view and participate in activities being executed by the classroom teachers and the ENL teachers. Furthermore, ELL classroom teachers and the ENL teachers will provide parents with strategies and activities they can do at home with their children during the Extended Day Tuesdays. The ENL teacher will also provide workshops to parents focusing on strategies they could use at home to support their children with developing the spoken and written English language. In addition, grade teams and our Special Education team will provide workshops to parents of ELLs with IEPS on how to read an IEP and the Special Education process. They are informed about Math, NYSESLAT, ELA, and Science state tests; testing exemptions for new ELLs; testing accommodations for all ELLs; and the promotional policy for ELLs via letter, parents meetings, and via SCHOOLCXNT an automated system through the internet. (Correspondence is provided in the parents’ language of choice, when possible.] In addition, correspondence in other languages provided by the Department of Education (DOE) is routinely distributed to our Spanish, Chinese and Arabic speaking parents; as well as available DOE correspondence in other languages represented at our school, such as Bengali and Mandarin. The translation/interpretation unit may be used, if needed, although we frequently rely on the assistance of multilingual parents and staff within our public school community. Additionally, Public School 83 provides materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their academic achievement; (eg. Family Literacy Workshops, Star/Math Reports, Progress Reports and Curriculum Night). The school also provides Parent Involvement Workshops (eg. Nutrition, Science, Health, Technology, Music, Art, Physical Education Arts & 2018-19 CEP 78  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Crafts and Behavior), and there is always a translator available to ease communication whenever it is deemed necessary. The needs of parents are evaluated in informal and formal ways through Student -Led Conferences, meetings, workshops, surveys, school events, PTA meetings, etc. The educators and administrators listen and have a conversation with parents. As a 21 Century Community school, administrators and educators participate in a Community Forum 2x a year to answer their questions and concerns. Parents always add valuable information about their children, their background, strengths and weaknesses, behavior and academic work, as well as their socio-economic situation. We work cooperatively with them, and make student referrals for different services according to the students’ needs. The parental involvement activities address the needs of the parents by providing workshops, meetings, and counseling. Parents are also given referrals to outside services whenever it is deemed necessary. In addition, the ENL teacher disseminates to new parents information about courses offered at Union Settlement. We view parents as an integral component of our school community and work closely with them so as to ensure their children’s improvement and success. Schedule and Topics Parent Workshops: February 12, 2019 Understanding the New York State ELA Mandates and Regulations: What ELL Parents Can Do to Support Their Child at Home provided by our Reading Specialist . February 26, 2019 Understanding the State Math Exam Mandates and Regulations: What ELL Parents Can Do to Support Their Child at Home provided by our Math Specialist. January 8, 2019 Understanding the NYSESLAT provided by our ENL teacher and The Road Map for English Language Learners provided by the ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator. September -June , Parent Classroom Visitations- Twice a month on a Tuesday ELL Parent Workshops-workshops to parents focusing on strategies they could use at home to support their children with developing the spoken and written English language provided by the ENL teacher. November 13, 2018 How Can ELL Parents Help Their Child Improve His/Her Academic Achievement? November 27, 2018 How Can I Use My Home Language to Help My Child Improve His/Her Reading? December 11, 2018 How Can I Support My Child With His/Her Homework? December 18, 2018 How Can I Help My Child Develop Organizational Skills to Improve His/Her Learning? January 8, 2019 What Games Can I Play at Home to Support My Child in Math? January 15, 2018 How Can I Get My Child to Ask Questions and Use Descriptive Language? December 2018 ELLs and IEPS: Navigating the IEP. How Can ELL Parents read an IEP and Learn about the Special Education Process? Provided by grade teams and our Special Education team. December 2018 and May 2019 -PS 83/City Year Community Forum- 2x a year 2018-19 CEP 79 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 80  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Luis Munoz Rivera - Public School 83 Borough Manhattan School Number 083 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Frances Castillo Coach Kevin Cranmer -K/2 ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Monica Gonzalez Teacher/Subject Area Evelyn Zapata/ 2nd grade Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Pena/3rd grade Related-Service Provider Suzanne Bent Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Hazel Cruz Coach n/a School Counselor Dan Forreiro Parent Maria Mosso Parent Coordinator Selina Melendez Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Chui Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 81  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 429 Total number of ELLs 41 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.56% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): None If yes, indicate language(s): None Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the school year 2018-2019, At Public School 83 ELL students will be assessed using the Next Step Guided Reading Assessment by Jan Richardson and the ELL periodic assessment and the Early Star/Star literacy computerized assessment. All students are assessed in English. Students entering our school identified as speaking only the Spanish language are assessed in Spanish using the Spanish version of Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. In addition to the aforementioned assessments, we also give our students a pre writing assessment in each of the writing genres ie: narrative, informative and argumentative. A rubric is utilized to determine students needs and strengths. In grades Kindergarten and first grade they are given the phonemic/phonics assessment 2x a year. In kindergarten they also take the early literacy 2x a year. in the content of mathematics, all students Kindergarten through fifth grade are given the 2018-19 CEP 82  pre-requisite exam In mathematics to inform student strengths and needs.Throughout the year they are also given a math exemplar at the end of each unit. As part of the ELA curriculum, students are also evaluated through embedded assessments and culminating tasks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data informs us that for new incoming Kindergarten students and first grade students we need to continue working on securing basic sight words, letter recognition and letter/sound correspondence. The data also shows that as the students progress from one grade to the next what inhibits their ability to attain grade level benchmarks is their lack of these basic fundamentals. The data also indicates that for students in the lower elementary grades (grades 1 and 2) the students are deficient in cross checking using all three cueing systems as a result of their lack of knowledge about the language syntax and their inability to use vocabulary to utilize meaning cues. As we progress into the upper grades 3rd-5th these lower grade deficiencies are manifesting into ELL students dropping off endings, conjugating verbs and the superlatives. As a result, these deficiencies are resulting in a decrease in accuracy rate which inhibits them from achieving grade level benchmarks and attaining true comprehension. As a result of this data, teachers strategically group students for differentiated instruction in literacy and mathematics. In an effort to build the foundational skills we utilize our City Year Core Members to conduct one to one support around targeted areas based on student need as per the data ie: vocabulary, Syntax, Morphological skills, pragmatics and or phonological skills and writing. Our assessment tools also serve as a source for planning our after school title III and RTI programs. Within the classroom, teachers group students accordingly to provide them with guided reading at least three times a week. Our ESL teacher also provides integrated periods to support students either in ELA or the content areas as deemed by data and student need. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We currently use the NYSESLAT results coupled with the third level analysis from the Fountas and Pinnell and the ELL periodic assessment data given at the end of the year. In addition, students also take the STAR Early Literacy and STAR Math an adaptive computerized assessment in grades K-2nd and the Star literacy and START Math in grades 3rd through 5th 4x a year. This assessment provides us with information as to students reading levels and math levels as per the standards and areas that need to be addressed to ensure students are on level and/or making progress towards meeting grade level expectations and common core standards. As a team we find correlations between all assessments and determine entry points for our students. Throughout the year teachers conduct informal running records to progress monitor. Furthermore, students also complete a published written piece after each writing unit which is assessed with a common core aligned rubric that has been normed by the team. Students also complete a math exemplar at the end of each math unit which is also assessed with an exemplar rubric that is normed by the team. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Upon gathering the data our City Year Team works with students in grades third through fifth for one block of pull out and also support the classroom teachers providing small group support and one on one support. In the lower grades our para-professional assist by providing a period of Reading Rescue to identified students on a daily basis. Our para professionals assigned to lower grade classrooms also assist with one to one support and small group support. During teacher's professional preps many have opted to utilize the time for small group instruction and during this time also support with interventions. We also have our Response to Intervention block which is scheduled 3x a week for 30 minutes. During this time teachers 2018-19 CEP 83  groups students based on data and provide them with the additional support. Although teacher focuses on one group at a time, the other groups are assigned to work on reinforcement material the teacher has already addressed with them. Student teachers are also an asset we are fortunate to have. Student teachers are also assigned to work with students as per data and needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This data is utilized to provide English Language Learners with rigorous instruction that supports all students regardless of their ethnic backgrounds and needs. Upon careful data analysis, students who score below specified levels of performance on school-wide assessments and English language proficiency assessments are identified and provided with supports matched to identified needs. Based on student performance students are grouped into appropriate levels of RtI. Students whose data indicates they need extra attention are placed at a level 2 of RtI and are supported by providers in addition to receiving Level 1 of RtI. These students receive the additional 30 minutes of intervention 3x a week by the classroom teacher via small group instruction during our 90 minute literacy block. . During this time, but not limited to, teachers utilize strategies such as rich text, previewing key concepts and challenging vocabulary, close reading, group and paired discussions, language frames, shared writing, role playing, story telling, writing tools to facilitate with the writing process, modeling, singing songs, reciting rhymes, turn and talks, writing celebrations, playing word games, books on tape, interactive word walls to develop the skills and competencies that are lacking. In addition to the RtI component, during the integrated English as a New Language units of study and Stand Alone units students continue to receive the support needed with language instruction, written language, word reading and spelling skills, fluency and reading comprehension. Although RTI periods are geared towards ELA, we also have embedeed an additional mathematics period where students are afforded the opportunity of center time to reinforce mathematical skills as per data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT, published writing pieces, informal running records, post writing assessment across genres, Early Star and Star literacy/ STAR Math assessment and our ANET periodic assessments in ELA and Mathematics are all used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The ENL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) and the RLAT are also additional tools utilized by the team to evaluate and inform our ENL program. The team cross reference data looking for correlations and or disparities to determine strengths and weakness to our program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The LAP team consists of teachers who directly support our ELL population. As a result of this composition, the team is determining the findings and therefore receiving it first hand. As a means of keeping the rest of the school community abreast of programs and classrooms strategies that are proving to be effective, information is disseminated during our extended day Monday and Tuesday professional development sessions. Time is built into our professional schedule to share findings and address adjustments being made to day to day programs. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 84  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In order to meet the CR Part 154.2 regulations our ELL students are heterogeneously grouped in one class by grade. Our ENL teacher provides services via three models stand alone, integrated and flexible as reflected by the NYSESLAT results. During the standalone blocks of instructional time students are immersed in the English Language via a myriad of strategies ensuring students spend a bulk of their time in discussions, reading and writing. For the integrated instructional blocks the ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher supporting students attain the planned lesson by reinforcing content vocabulary, providing additional visual cues, implementing additional discussions before, during and after the lesson. Flexible time is determined by student need and data. If an ENL student requires of more one on one assistance the teacher then schedules for a group of flexible time. If students demonstrate to work well within their classroom environment the teacher then provides additional integrated time. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The classroom teachers supporting ELL students work collaboratively with the ENL teacher when creating their schedules to ensure that the mandated instructional minutes are delivered as per the CR Part 154.2. For stand-alone units of study students are grouped by levels and between two consecutive grades via a pull out model. For integrated units of study the ENL teacher pushes into the classrooms housing ELL students and co-teach with the classroom teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For each program model content is delivered in the following ways: Stand Alone: ENL teacher groups students by NYSESLAT levels ensuring students are grouped within two contiguous grades. The ENL teacher works at ensuring she is reinforcing the instructional core while simultaneously developing the English Language. Language development is fostered through purposeful, deliberate conversations and Reading and Writing are specifically taught and integrated into each content area. Strategies such as building background knowledge, close interactive reading aloud, storytelling using wordless books, collaborative discussions and debate, role playing, intensive vocabulary instruction, language frames for speaking and listening, and shared writing are a few that are utilized to promote ELL's oral language development. Some strategies for promoting ELL's written language are providing different writing tools, promoting different writing purposes , genres and formats, co-constructing stories, maintaining dialogue journals, writing about reading after deep text analysis, modeling language structures during shared writing and integrating oral language and vocabulary instruction into writing instruction by having students verbalize their thinking before putting it into writing and sharing aloud after they have both thought and written about the topic. Integrated: During integrated blocks of instruction many of the above strategies are implemented supporting the classroom instruction. During this block of time the ENL teacher supports ELL students as well as other students to attain teaching points. The ENL teacher utilizes strategies above to facilitate students entry points and successful attainment of lesson and 2018-19 CEP 85  tasks. The ENL teacher also supports by providing them with translations, and sharing the responsibility of teaching by supporting the lesson with additional pictures cues, repetition, translation programs, partnership work with a more advanced ELL student supporting a student who is at the entering level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their in their home languages throughout the year we provide translation services. On staff we have 2 Asian teachers who assist with translation in Chinese and Mandarin. We also have 7 teachers who assist with Spanish translations when needed. For other non prevalent languages we request DOE translators for NYS exams. In addition to translations, we also use students writing pieces to evaluate how they are transferring their home language into written English. We also create a buddy system within each class pairing more fluent English speaking students with same home languages to support and share what students are understanding. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. Our instructional plan for a student with interrupted formal education or SIFE may include working in a small group within the classroom with the classroom teacher or a bilingual paraprofessional, receiving intervention services such as AIS and RTI and participating in a Title III after school program or Saturday Academy 6b&C. For Newcomers and Developing students we currently have a technology program - Accelerated Reader which assist students in developing vocabulary called words in a flash which students are exposed to on a daily basis for 10-15 minutes daily to develop language. We also provide an after school program through Title III for the largest number of ELL's within two consecutive grades. Furthermore, we also provide an academic after school program in reading and math to further assist students in the areas of need. We are fortunate to have City Year Volunteers who also assist by providing one on one instructional support. This current year we also have an after school program PHOTOS and ME for ELL students supported by Union Settlement and Columbia University. Many of the strategies being utilized with this program are being carried over into our ENL program. 6d. Our school does not have any ELL students in need of a long term plan. If the need should arise our plan is to provide them with Academic Intervention Services for a block of 45 minutes on a daily basis. In addition, these students would be invited to attend our instructional after school program and our extended day 150 minute a week program. 6e: Former ELL students they continue to receive support via strategy lessons, guided reading, small group instruction and one-on-one conferences with their classroom teachers and via our flexible integrated ENL program in the Core Content Area. If the need is great they also receive support from the AIS provider and may also be recommended to continue receiving ESL at risk services. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Materials: Wilson - Fundations K-2nd Materials: Ready Gen Reading Program Kindergarten thru 5th Materials: Fundations - phonics/phonological development Materials: Recipe for Reading - intervention Materials: Reading Rescue - intervention Materials: Eureka Math K-5th Materials: Sadlier vocabulary workshop 2nd - 5th Materials: Sadlier phonics Kindergarten - 2nd Materials: Renaissance Learning Math Facts in a Flash (technology) First thru Fifth Grade 2018-19 CEP 86  Materials: Renaissance Learning Words in a Flash (technology) First thru Fifth Grade Materials: FOSS Science hands on Kits Materials: Passport Social Studies Instructional Strategies include but are not limited to conceptual network and symantic maps to build vocabulary. Furthermore, all of the multiple intelligences with a strong emphasis on visual, kinesthetic and tactile are utilized to develop the reading, writing, speaking and listening modalities. A lot of time is spent on developing the Five Talk Moves to develop discussion and conversational skills during literacy, math and content lessons. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricula, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWD's to achieve their IEP goals and obtain English Proficiency in the following ways: A Special Education teacher participates in inquiry work alongside general education teachers focusing on possible instructional strategies that foster group work where needs are addressed. Our IEP teacher support students via a push in/pull out model The IEP teacher meets with teachers servicing ELL students with special needs to discuss instructional strategies Scheduling supports a push in pull out model for academic intervention teachers A flexible schedule is created for students according to need where students travel to a designated general education classes to support their identified needs. In placing Ell students with SWD's in ICT classes we follow the New York City Special Education Reform criteria keeping in mind that the students are ELL's and incorporating into their IEP's the necessary ELL strategies they need to continue instructional advancement. The ENL teacher provides professional development to special education teachers on strategies to best support ENL students. ENL teacher utilizes the integrated and flexible criteria to support students and teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELL's in ELA, math and other core content areas is solely determined by data. Our school utilizes our universal screening tool - Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, the GO Math Pre-requisite Assessment, the STARS or Early Literacy Assessment on Accelerated Reading as well as informal data gathered by the classroom teacher and the ELL Periodic Assessment to guide instruction for ELL's. This data is used to group students accordingly for our Response to Intervention program 3x a week during our first instructional period and small group work during our literacy and math blocks. Students identified for RTI are the bottom 1/3 and are grouped by need. At this time students are offered intervention in areas such as decoding, word work, sight word development, vocabulary, cueing systems, comprehension, listening and speaking, writing, number sense, multiplication and division. During our day to day literacy block, ELL's are consistently progressed monitored. Instruction is then modified providing them with differentiated instruction that is scaffolded specifically for ELL students. Differentiation could be in different entry points for assigned tasks, the use of aides such as picture cues, personal word walls, personal instructional charts, graphic organizers, etc.. During our literacy block teachers target student needs via guided reading and small group instruction. During our 2 nd math block students are grouped according to need and provided with tools and instructional support addressing identified needs. Instruction during intervention is solely in English. If during this time the ENL teacher is providing integrated or flexible blocks of time she supports students with translations and additional tools and strategies they can use before, during and after reading or math. It is our goal to address the needs of all ELL's students through out the day at different points and time. Primary focus is given to students who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and or competencies being measured regardless of the subgroup. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At the current time we are considering adding an additional prep period of writing into our weekly schedule. It is our expectation that during this block of time students inclusive of ELL students can work on language standards that will 2018-19 CEP 87  facilitate language acquisition. We believe that with our reading/writing program Ready Gen coupled with Fundations and our Reading Rescue and Recipe For Reading intervention programs we will be able to further support our ENL students with needs specific to language acquisition. As a school we will also be conducting inquiry on writing this 2017-2018 school year. A cycle of professional development focusing on inquiry has been programmed. It is expected that after this 7 session cycle teachers will be able to go through a teaching and learning process focusing on the school wide trend that will be determined from our data. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the current time we are not discontinuing any programs or services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL students are afforded the opportunity to attend our enrichment/ instructional after school program for grades 1st through 5th via an application process. Our enrichment/instructional program for our early grades 1st and 2nd focus on 2 days of dance and the other 3 days on instructional support. In the upper grades 3rd through 5th, students are provided with homework help and clubs. In addition, utilizing the Title III funds an after school program is offered for grades with the largest number of ELL's as a means of further addressing their needs. This programs is geared to building on students strengths to build on areas needing further development. Time is dedicated to building vocabulary, read aloud with accountable talk, as a means of building on oral language development. We also collaborate with Union Settlement who support our 2nd grade ENL students with the Photos and Me program. This program uses photography as a tool for students to engage in discussions and writing. In addition, ENL students are also afforded the opportunity to attend school trips, assemblies, spirit week, Randall's Island soccer program, the YMCA swimming program for 2nd grade students, our school basketball team and Girls on the Run. All ELL's participate in enrichment programs as part of a school/class effort. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials, including technology are used to support ELL's in Literacy and the content area: Read Aloud Big Books K-5 Leveled Classroom libraries K-5 for literacy and content area Fountas and Pinnell Assessment BAS Guided Reading Sets K-5 Fundations - Wilson Learning English K-5 - ENL's Only Renaissance Learning (technology) NYSESLAT instructional materials -ENL's Only Reading Rescue - 1 st grade students Recipe for Reading - Kindergarten thru Second Grade Fundations K-2 Ready Gen K- 5 Go Math K-5 Investigations - Math 1x a week Wordly Wise - Vocabulary grades 3 rd thru 5th Smart boards are also utilized to present lessons and engage students in interactive games. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When we make decisions about student placement we place ELL students within the same grade all in the same class. When possible we assign a classroom teacher who can speak the same language of the majority of ELL students. To further support students, we also make an effort to ensure that we can provide a buddy system amongst students who share the name native language. Classroom libraries incorporate languages represented within the ENL classrooms. Although many of our students are not 2018-19 CEP 88  fluent readers or writers in their native language, the books are used as a picture resource allowing them to make connections and transference to the English language. The books are also used to facilitate generating of ideas for writing. For students who are fluent readers and writers they are offered the opportunities to read book in their native language and then explain in English their understanding of text. Furthermore, we also utilize google translate allowing for students to see text in written English and the written translation in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ESL services support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels as students are grouped not only by levels but also by grade/age. When creating our groups we aim to keep them together as a grade and proficiency level. When block of time are limited we then group students within two corresponding grades such as Kindergarten and First, second and third and fourth and fifth. Materials purchased for the ESL program are all age and grade level appropriate. We ensure that students have access to materials they can engage with tactility and kinesthetically as well as, ample opportunities for visual support and oral support such as books on tape. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As a school that shares the building with P.S. 182 we have successfully worked out a schedule where we share our resources. Our lower grades 1st and 2nd are being provided with music by the P.S.182 music teacher. Our co-locating school also provides our 5th grade students with technology. In return, we provide their 1st and 2nd grade students with Art and their 3rd and 4th grade classes with library/writing. Furthermore, the physical education teachers from both schools also coordinate where both schools can simultaneously utilize the gym engaging both groups of students in structured physical activities. During special productions hosted by CBO organizations, invitations are also extended by both schools allowing students to partake in the activities being offered. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). An orientation is offered in July and in September for all incoming students and their parents. At this orientation provided by administration and supported by our Parent Coordinator and an ENL teacher parents have the opportunity to inquire about our programs. In addition, handouts and instructional packets are provided to parents in varying languages most prevalent to our school providing them with a lens on how they can assist their children at home. Information of after school programs are also made available. We also provide them with information about our Mt. Sinai Pediatric Clinic program and provide them with the enrollment packets. Upon the child starting at our school we also ask teachers to create a buddy system to assist the child with the integration into the class. These students when the language is shared serve as translators for the students and for the teacher. The Parent Coordinator provides parents with information regarding how she can be of assistance through out the school year and the workshops that will be available to them. The ENL teacher provides parents with an insight as to how the classroom will look, feel and sound like during instruction. Teacher also explains the type of work they will be receiving and how best they can support their child at home. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At Public School 83 we do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 89  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In supporting our ENL teachers and all teachers in general we are working with West Ed consultants focusing on QTEL- Quality Teaching of English Language. Teachers participate in a three day all day workshop and receive one on one coaching. During one on one coaching they are being supported with strategies they can implement to assist the ELL learner. Although these strategies are intended for ELL students they support all learners. In addition to the work being done with West Ed we are also working with ANET who also provide the one on one coaching and guide professional learning communities with the teaching and learning cycle which is grounded on data. Literacy Design Collaborative are Department of Education staff developers working with teachers in grades third through fifth with close reading strategies and writing about reading. The coaching revolves around breaking apart of writing prompts to support student responses to reading which supports ELL students. Mini tasks are embedded for the differentiation of the ELL needs. We have also partnered with Hunter College where a professor from the school will be coaching our lower grades Kindergarten through Second on reading development. In addition, she will also be providing whole school professional development in the same area. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. the required 15% and 50% ELL specific professional development is supported by West Ed - QTEL.and Hunter College Literacy Initiative. The professional learning opportunities occur via individual coaching sessions and whole group learning and contribute to the hours mandated for continued teacher and leadership education. In addition to these professional development opportunities our ENL providers are also afforded the opportunity to attend additional workshops that are offered by the NYC Dept of Education. For the school year 2018-2019 teachers will also be receiving professional development in the areas of Social Emotional Learning and Equity and Access for all to ensure that we are meeting the needs of the whole child as well as subgroups. Teachers are mandated to maintain records of their independent work with coaches and at the end of each day of coaching administration receives feedback from the provider. For whole school sessions agenda are provided and attendance is recorded and maintained in our professional development school wide binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 90  Parent Meetings are scheduled during our extended Tuesday Parent engagement time. During this time meetings are scheduled with parents to discuss student progress. In addition, parents are also provided with strategies to assist students at home. When interpretation and translation is needed we utilize the staff on hand for prevalent languages. For languages that are less prevalent, we make arrangements to have someone available to assist the parent. We either request a translator from central or ask the parent if they have someone who can assist with interpretation. In situations where parents cannot attend a scheduled sessions teachers make provisions by scheduling time during their preps or other times that coordinates with both parties. There have been situations where phone conferences are held to support parents who have very busy schedules. As a school we also have parent engagement Friday's where parents are invited to be a part of the classroom for one hour and participate in activities. Our monthly calendar highlights the day and focus. Calendars and scheduled events are also posted on schoolCNXT. Via schoolCNXT teachers are also able to communicate with parents regardless of language since the program will provide translations and even speak the message that is being transmitted between parties. This system is utilized to send parent information regarding upcoming activities and for teachers to communicate with parents via text messaging. In situations where parents may need technical support they can speak their message in their prevalent language and the teacher will receive it in English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We aim at increasing parent involvement via a variety of methods. Throughout the school year we invite parents to participate in our parent read aloud once a month. With our parent read aloud parents are encouraged to come and read to a class a book of choice and in the language of preference. In instances where they choose to read in a language other then English we have students within the class to offer the translation. We also have their own children come and assist their parents with the read aloud. We have also scheduled within our instructional day one Friday a month for parent to engage in their child's class with an instructional focus. Each focus and scheduled date is notified to parents via our monthly school calendar which is also uploaded onto school CNXT. We also host a variety of monthly workshops targeting different areas to support our parents with instruction and the well being of their children. The instructional programs are geared towards equipping parents with strategies they can use at home in the areas of literacy and mathematics. At these workshops parents are also provided with materials and resources they can use at home to support their children. At these workshops we ensure that translations are being provided via our parent coordinator, a teacher and when necessary we utilize the assistance of parents who are fluent in both languages. Furthermore, we also honor them via our annual parent breakfast, our annual Multicultural Dinner, our awards ceremony three times a year, and our Holiday Celebration. Parents are also encouraged to volunteer during our school wide events and activities such as book fair, soccer and any PTA related fundraising events. Administrators also host once a month "coffee with the principls" it is expected that during this time that administrators can have informal conversation regarding needs and wants for the school and the children we serve. It is often during this time that parents feel comfortable sharing concerns and ideas since it is held in an informal, relaxing environment. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 91  2018-19 CEP 92 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Frances Castillo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 93  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Luis Munoz Rivera PS 83 School DBN: 04M083 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Frances Castillo Title Principal Hazel Cruz Assistant Principal Selina Melendez Parent Coordinator Monica Gonzalez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Mosso Parent Evelyn Zapata - 2nd grade Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Kevin Cranmer- K/2 n/a Coach Coach Dan Forreiro School Counselor Alexandra Estrella Ms. Chui Suzanne Bent Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 2018-19 CEP 94  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 4M083 School Name: Public School 83 Superintendent: A. Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Hazel Monica Cruz Gonzalez Assistant Principal ESL Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A. When parents enroll a student at Public School 83, Luis Munoz Rivera School, they complete all enrollment documentation, which includes Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey conducted by a licensed and trained pedagogue. Using the information gathered from the language survey and parent interviews, the school determines individual written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all family members of the school community are provided with appropriate and timely information in their preferred language. b. The Language Access Coordinator and ENL Coordinator collaborate with the Pupil Accounting Secretary to ensure that all Parent Preferred Languages are input in relevant screens in ATS. Updated RCPL and RAPL reports are maintained in a Language Access binder in the front office and communicated to classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 95  c. Public School 83 conducts a School Staff Language Survey at the beginning of each school year to determine the language representation and skill set among the staff. The NYC DOE Parent Survey provides valuable insight into how the language and communication needs of each parent have been met by the school community 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese English Spanish Bengali Fulani Mongolian Pilipino Portugese Somali 10 16 335 80 7 1 1 1 2 1 2.2 3.52 73.79 17.62 1.54 .22 .22 .22 .44 .22 7 15 335 82 7 1 1 1 2 1 1.54 3.3 73.79 18.06 1.54 .22 .22 .22 .44 .22 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 96  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School-Wide Calendar Monthly basis throughout the school year Classroom Teacher Welcome Letters September Principal's Welcome Message September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator will translate calendar to support the diversity of our school community. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization. The SchoolCNXT application is another tool we use to ensure parents receive the information in their language. This application allows for parents to recieve information in their language and provides them with the option of hearing the message or reading the message. The original documents in English will be provided to the Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of September and sent to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation in the languages represented in the RCPL ATS report. Immediately upon receipt of the translated documents, the letters will be printed and disseminated to parents in a timely manner. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization. The SchoolCNXT application is another tool we use to ensure parents receive the information in their language. This application allows for parents to recieve information in their language and provides them with the option of hearing the message or reading the message. The original documents in English will be provided to the Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of 2018-19 CEP 97  Student Led Conferences November / March and May Holiday and School Recess Letters Throughout the school year September and sent to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation in the languages represented in the RCPL ATS report. Immediately upon receipt of the translated documents, the letters will be printed and disseminated to parents in a timely manner. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization. The SchoolCNXT application is another tool we use to ensure parents receive the information in their language. This application allows for parents to recieve information in their language and provides them with the option of hearing the message or reading the message. The original documents in English will be provided to the Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of September and sent to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation in the languages represented in the RCPL ATS report. Immediately upon receipt of the translated documents, the letters will be printed and disseminated to parents in a timely manner. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization. The Google translate application is also utilized when necessary. The Language Access Coordinator will utilize the translated document templates provided by the Translation & Interpretation Unit to append notices in the languages represented 2018-19 CEP 98  IEP Meetings Throughout the school year in the RCPL ATS report. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization or utilize the Google translate application as a resource when necessary. The SchoolCNXT application is another tool we use to ensure parents receive the information in their language. This application allows for parents to recieve information in their language and provides them with the option of hearing the message or reading the message. Staff will be available to assist during scheduled meetings. For low incident, student specific and/or not covered DOE languages we will seek collaboration from members of our school community who can support us with translation. We will also use language translation funds to have documents translated by a paid organization as needed. The Google translate application is also utilized when necessary. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Attendance plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At all school-wide events or meetings staff is disseminated throughout to assist with translation. PTA meetings/ 2nd Tuesday monthly 2018-19 CEP 99  Curriculum Night (1x September 17, 2018) Parent Teacher Conferences 3x a year (November, March, May) When necessary we also utilize the Google translate application to assist with translations in the event we are unable to accommodate for translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Public School 83 has developed systems and procedures to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency. Family contact information is maintained by the main office and classroom teachers to provide immediate access to yearly-updated Student Emergency Contact Cards, on which parent preferred language of communication is noted. The school will utilize all available resources, which may include multilingual staff or Language Line over-the-phone interpretation, to make expeditious contact with families and effectively communicate necessary information Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to meet the language needs of all Public School 83 community members and ensure that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education, staff participates in a Language Access orientation at the beginning of each school year. Each grade level is provided with a language access binder detailing the information, resources and procedures to achieve the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, and teachers are provided with individual support by the Language Access Coordinator Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 100  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Public School 83 uses a variety of methods to ensure that Limited English Speaking parents are made aware of their right to receive information and are provided with meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Parents are informed and notified of requirements for translation and interpretation services through written documentation including a Welcome Poster displayed near the entrance to the school, a language placard in the main office, the Parents Bill of Rights, the Parents Guide to Language Access. . Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator and our Public School 83 active Parent Teacher Association facilitate parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive by making them aware via translated documents that translated parent surveys are available on the Translation and Interpretation Units intranet page. Our school also utilizes the SchoolCNXT system which sends parents ongoing information which they can read or listen to in their prevalent language. Parents can also use this system to communicate with us in their native language and we can receive the information in English. The parent coordinator also makes herself available to assist in helping parents log on to the intranet to complete surveys in their perspective language if and when necessary. Our school has used the feedback to better allocate funding for translation of documents and translations at school events ie; award ceremonies, parent meetings and parent/teacher conferences. Results from the parent survey are also used to implement revisions and focused enhancements to the school's Language Translation and Interpretation Plan and make strategic investments in resources that facilitate more communication between the school and parents. 2018-19 CEP 101 
