2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M084 School Name: P.S. 084 LILLIAN WEBER Principal: EVELYN LOLIS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lillian Weber School 310300010084 Pre K-5 School Number (DBN): 03M084 32 West 92 nd Street, New York, NY 10025 212-799-2534 212-501-9071 Phone Number: Fax: Anita Hauschild ahauschild@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Evelyn J.Lolis JazlynMena Tina Stege CelineBeloeilAnn Preis N/A N/A Neil Fitzgerald District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 Street Ialtschul@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: (212) 222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Avenue<br> YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Evelyn J. Lolis JazlynMena Tina Stege N/A N/A NessaPreis Neil Fitzgerald CelineBeloeil AfroditiCuevas LauraMaruska Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) SBOSchool-based Organization representative Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sori Ahn Emily Hernandez YasminJones Erika Pasinkoff Jeremy Kis Rob Endelman Sherri Semon AnnPreis JanetteCordova SaraPetko Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Lillian Weber School strives to provide equity and access for all learners. We give our students the necessary tools to develop critical thinking skills, a strong work ethic, and the sense of responsibility that are crucial to creativity and independence in their quest for learning. PS 84 offers students a deep and complex understanding of the world, and teaches them to be respectful and curious of diverse cultures and the planet we share. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 84 is a Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 5 elementary school with nearly 700 students. The school population is comprised of 8% African American, 35% Hispanic, 48% White and 3% Asian students. Boys account for 45% of students enrolled and girls 55%. Our school can be characterized by its student-centered classrooms, focus on rigorous instruction, and inclusive philosophy. We are a professional learning community and implement a workshop methodology for literacy and integration of content area instruction. Our current math curriculum, called Bridges, is based on constructivist principles and experiential learning. This year, PS 84 was selected among a highly qualified pool of school applicants offered participate in the NYCDOE Software Engineering Program Junior (SEPjr), a high-quality computer science program for kindergarten through fifth grade students that balances rigorous and meaningful direct instruction with open-ended creative computing. Social Emotional Learning is prioritized at PS 84. This year, we will continue to implement the RULER program, which focuses on developing innovative, effective approaches to teaching emotional intelligence to students of various ages, staff, parents, teachers, and administrators. . Many of our teachers trained in Restorative Circles which focuses on creating inclusive, sensitive, and tolerant classroom communities. And, this year student peer mediators will be trained to offer conflict/resolution during Lunch/Recess. Our school community will also read and have discussions on empathy with a Book of the Month, every month. Teaching students about healthy bodies and minds and curbing childhood obesity, we have a rooftop garden where we grow many of the foods served in the lunchroom. With our Garden to Café program, students are able to eat what they grow. In addition, we recycle, compost, and cook in the school cooking labs. The PTA has written several grants to support this work, including, but not limited to Ample Table and Lowe’s. Once again, this year, our school is one of a few chosen in the entire city to pilot the Zero Waste Program, reinforcing our ideal of keeping green and minimizing our footprint on our planet. PS 84 is a very unique school. This year our monolingual classes will specialize in Computer Science and Media Arts studies. Our school will continue to offer Spanish and French Dual Language programs for Kindergarten through Grade 5 students. Students in the French and Spanish dual language classrooms learn all subjects in two languages. This requires teachers to translate all lessons into both languages. PS 84 has been a pioneer in dual language instruction in Spanish since 1985. The French program was added in 2008. Incorporating the Arts into our learning is a priority at PS 84. Our robust and well established Arts, Windows to the World, is a program inclusive of all arts disciplines. We collaborate with some of the most prestigious arts organizations and institutions in New York City. Our partnerships are fully aligned with both the Blueprint for the Arts and Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). The school community believes that the arts are an important component to student learning. This is why every student leaves PS 84 knowing how to read music, count rhythms and play at least one instrument. Some of our partnerships include, New York City Center (dance, theatre and movement) , Magic Box Productions (photography and media) , Julliard, (music theory and instrumental), 92nd Street Y (music appreciation), Neighborhood Music and Arts (dance), the New York Museum of Natural History (Science and art), the New York Historical Society (art), the Frick Collection (art), and Diller Quaille (classical music). In addition, our students are exposed to in- and out-of-school concerts, performances and workshops. Students participate in plethora of residencies as well, and are given opportunities to perform at Lincoln Center. At PS 84 we speak four languages, English, Spanish, French and the language of the Arts. 2018-19 CEP 10  Parent participation is crucial and an essential part of our community. We have a vital and enormously supportive PTA. It is through their fund-raising efforts that the school can provide many of the activities and programs for our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 38% who speak a language other than English at home. These students need support to strengthen their literacy skills in English. Fifteen percent of our students have IEPs for learning disabilities. We have 12:1:1 classes and Co-teaching (ICT) classes for all grades K through 5. In addition, a full complement of related services is available for those students as mandated. All students learn the same curriculum throughout the year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This year, PS 84 will continue to focus on rigorous curriculum and coherent instruction. It is also our goal to ensure that strong family-community ties are fostered by creating a series of workshops and learning opportunities to keep families informed about curricula, expectations, and student achievement. We are proud that our school improved in The Framework for Great Schools elements of Trust and Effective School Leadership from 3.63 to 3.81. It is also our belief that an effective school encompasses all elements of the Framework for Great Schools in order to create and focus on strong and well-integrated practices within a school community, across classrooms and to increase student achievement. PS 84 strives to advance Equity and Excellence for All through the three key areas: Academic Excellence, Student and Community Support, and Innovation. Academic Excellence: We strive to meet students' diverse needs with a variety of in school and after school programs and initiatives for both students and teachers. We are proud of our efforts to strive for excellence as indicated by the DOE's Framework for Great Schools. For example, PS 84 has set structures in place to ensure that all students are provided with the opportunity to reach NYS grade level expectations in reading and ELA. PS 84 will have two Academic Intervention Support teachers who will provide RtI Tier 3 targeted instruction. Fundations literacy instruction will once again be implemented in Kindergarten. And, this year, Fundations instruction will roll into Grade 1. Student and Community Support and Innovation: For the first time in PS 84 history, we had yearlong inter-disciplinary initiatives on every grade level, Pre-K to Grade 5! Blooms of Multiculturalism! Artist Herve Tullet came to PS 84 and provided professional development for teachers focusing on conducting multi-sensory sessions with students. Workshops involved parents helping set out giant rolls of paper on the gymnasium floor with every grade, and then supporting our children as they created masterpieces of art, working side by side with students from different programs. Then the entire fifth grade student body painted a blooming mural on the side of our school wall with Herve Tullet himself! This project reinforced our understanding that as a diverse community, we can create beauty when we work side by side. 2018-19 CEP 11  There was the intensive One, Two, Tree Program for all Kindergartners funded by the Anne Fountaine Foundation, where all students on the grade learned about tress, how they help us live, and how humans have depicted them in art throughout the years. This program involved students and teachers visiting the American Museum of Folk Art and the Bronx Botanical Garden. With the aim of instilling cultural vibrancy and lifelong engagement in musical arts, the third graders participated in a yearlong string instrument residency with the Diller Quaile foundation. The fourth and fifth graders also had incredible cultural arts experiences with the Frick Collection. Since the fourth graders were too young to visit the museum, the museum arranged to bring a rare and cherished clock to the school for the students to study! The fifth graders did get to visit the museum, finally seeing the masterpiece paintings they researched and learned so much about throughout the year. Our Pre-K students had their first class trips to the Museum of Natural History, as they learned about nature, the environment, and were the first to see the museum’s exhibit on the humans five senses. This year, we had parents train teachers from every grade level train in Assemblage, a teaching technique where students utilize recyclable materials to make three-dimensional representations of their thinking. What incredible learning experiences for our children! How wonderful that they have been given the opportunity to experience our beautiful world in such engaging ways. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M084 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 656 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 35 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 12 30 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 40.0% % Attendance Rate 37.0% % Reduced Lunch 7.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 35.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 47.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 40 27 93.6% 3.0% 14.0% 8.1% 3.5% 5.2% 4 6% 5.1 61.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June of 2018, our data showed us that 68% of our Kindergarteners met proficiency on their independent reading goals for grade level expectations. Twenty percent were two levels below their goal, and 12% were one level below their grade level benchmark. Targeted early literacy intervention is needed to support these students to reach grade level expectations this year in first grade. 2017-2018 MOSL Running Records Level 1 Level 2 Levels 3/4 Grade K 20% 12% 68% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of students in the first grade reading below grade level expectations (Level 1 (23 out of 33 students; and level 2; 13 out of 19 students) in September 2018 will increase their reading level by one (to a level 2 or level 3) or meet their promotional criteria through the improvement of intervention on all RTI . 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers will lead students in strategy groups to support accessibility to higher leveled texts. Grade 1 students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 RTI teachers The literacy coach will meet with 1st grade teachers during common preps to disaggregate and analyze running records assessment data. The literacy coach will meet with 1st grade teachers during common preps to disaggregate and analyze running records assessment data. Grade 1 students Sept. 2018 to Oct. 2018 Grade 1 students March 2019 to Apr 2019 The literacy coach will meet with 1st grade teachers to facilitate professional development action research on small group instruction during reading workshop. Grade 1 students Nov. 2018 to Feb. 2019 The literacy coach, ENL and the IEP teacher will continue to work with classroom teachers to provide scaffolds for students with disabilities and students who receive ENL services. Grade 1 students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Intervention teachers will provide students with differentiated small group instruction, including intensified word study, phonics based learning and comprehension support. Grade 1 students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Students and families will gain access to an online video repository for additional support at home. Grade 1 students Jan. 2018 to June 2019 Parents of targeted students will also be provided with TC letters with suggestion of activities to implement at home. and their parents Grade 1 students and their parents November 2018, March 2019, June 2019 Classroom teachers Literacy Coach Literacy Coach 1st grade teachers Literacy Coach 1st Grade teachers Literacy Coach 1st grade teachers Literacy Coach ENL teacher IEP teacher RtI teachers Classroom teachers Literacy Coach Parent Coordinator STEAM teacher RtI teachers Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Literacy Coach and Parent Coordinator will work to provide workshops and/or a webinar and/or a video tutorial to better inform parents about the reading process and how teachers determine “Just Right” reading levels in addition to how parents can best support reading at home. Parents of targeted students will be provided with academic intervention support notice and academic resources to support their child's learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Reading Strategies Book by Jennifer Serravallo, 2015 Fountas and Pinnell LLI system, SPIRE reading intervention program Fundations, Wilson Language Training Words Their Way One extra prep for 1st grade teachers will be provided by administration. The PTA has raised funding to provide teachers with the extra preps. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% the identified students in first grade will be reading at least on a Level 2 (Level I or Level J) to be on track to meet the June 2019 goal. Using the Fountas and Pinnell LLI system, running records will be recorded during small group work to monitor progress. TC Assessment Pro data repository system will be monitored throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 16  Teachers College Running Records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Last year, our CEP goal of the percentage of Level 1, 2, and 3 incidents relating to uncooperative/non-compliant, disorderly, and disruptive behavior among students was supposed to decrease 15% from 44 to 38. The adjusted number of incidents for the decrease in student population was supposed to be 15% of 53 incidents (adjusted for student increase in population from 550 to 660), equalling 45 incidents. The actual number was 50. The number of incidents should have decreased by seven as adjusted by the total population increased to 655 students this year. Based on this result and teacher anecdotal evidence, that students are easily frustrated and often shut down when presented with challenges a goal of supporting students in self regulation and stress management is needed. Strengths:  Over the course of three years, students have been exposed to a variety of social emotional learning curriculum. Through these programs, students have become proficient at naming their emotions. This past school year we began to work with high risk students and placed them in an advisory group to give them a greater sense of purpose and belonging in our school community.  According to our recent school survey, 92% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child’s needs. 91% of parents feel that their school will make them aware of any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child’s academic performance. Needs:  PS 84 needs to continue to help students become resilient so they can persevere through challenges.  PS 84 needs to continue to empower students with tools and strategies to manage and reduce stress and anxiety.  PS 84 needs to continue to develop empathy in students so they better understand emotions of people around them as well as themselves. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 18  By June 2019, OORS incidents will decrease from 50 Level 1, 2, and 3 incidents by 15% to 42 incidents. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will attend PD in July 2018 on Equity and Access and Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy and Inclusive Schooling. All July 2018 Administration Teachers and Support Staff External consultant from Teachers College will meet with administration to plan for PD All students Aug. 2018 External Consultant from Teachers College PS 84 will create an Equity Team to promote Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy and Inclusive Schooling. The team will also review various lines of data (OORS, Advance, teacher observation/communications, anecdotal data from administration, student interviews, etc.) to plan. All students Sept. 2018 to Nov. 2018 Administration Administration Teacher Leaders External Consultant from Teachers College Ruler Trained Teachers Guidance Counselor The teacher led PLC on RULER, Yale University’s social emotional program, will continue to support teachers with skills sets to support SEL. All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 PS 84 applied for and received a grant for Rethink Ed SEL Program in July 2018. Rethink Ed SEL program is comprised of on-demand training modules which will provide our staff with the content and skill application knowledge needed to effectively implement SEL. Teachers and paraprofessionals engaged in PD on implementing RethinkED on October 2. They will get more PD training on rethinkEd on November 6, 2018. All Teachers and Sept. to Nov. 2018 Administration Paraprofessionals Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Rethink Ed SEL Consultants Administration Teachers School aides Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 20  Teachers will implement rethinkEd and RULER student-centered Instructional lessons and resources with accommodation and modification supports to meet the learning needs of every student. All students Nov. 2018 to June 2019 Administration Guidance Counselor Rethink ED comprehensive assessment tools will be given to students, and so will provide insights into students’ self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship and responsible decision-making skills. All students Students in grades 2-5 will continue to participate in restorative circles in the morning and afternoon. All students A series of assemblies after holidays to re-center and refocus students on self regulating and conflict resolution. All students Workshops for families will be presented on social emotional intelligence. All students Parents Families Teachers and students will be surveyed 3 times a year to measure students’ ability to manage stress, self-regulate and build compassion. Students from different programs will be mixed for special classes, so that students from different classes get to know each other. Teachers All students All students (Grades to 1-5) Special area teachers meet one period a week with groups of students with similar social emotional needs. Selected Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November 2018 to June 2019 Teachers Administration Teachers Guidance Counselor Classroom Teachers Assistant Principals Guidance Counselor Respect for All Liaison Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor DOH School Mental Health Consultant STEAM Teacher Specialty Teachers School Administration Specialty Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Jan. 2019 and Apr. 2019 Monthly on the 1st Friday of the month from Oct. 2018 to Dec. 2018 Nov. 2018 to June 2019 Sept.2018 to June 2019 Sept.2018 to June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Coordinator will collaborate with the Alanson White Institute of Child Psychology to provide social-emotional workshops for parents the first Tuesday of every month from October 2018 to May 2019 to support overall well-being. Helping Your Child to Develop Empathy, and Helping Create Healthy Routines With Your Child, are some of the workshop titles. The William Alanson White Institute of Psychiatry, 2018-19 CEP 21  Psychoanalysis & Psychology has distinguished itself as one of the World's most prominent and respected psychoanalytic training and treatment centers for almost seventy-five years. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RULER online Community Website Rethink Ed grant funded by city council discretionary funds Teachers will participate in PLC cycles. Administration Training scholarship funded by Re-imagining Education and Teachers College. Academic Intervention Service/RtI Tier 3 Reading teacher for primary grades AIS and RTI schedule to be created by intervention teachers. Intensity and Frequency of student intervention services will be determined by AIS, RTI teachers and administration in September 2108 Teachers participating in professional development during Election day and during Monday's professional development time on October 6. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, OORS incidents will be 15% less than January 2018 indicators, a reduction from 37 to 32 level 1, 2, and 3 incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the ELA June 2018 Instructional Report, there was an overall increase in ELA proficiency in grades 3-5 from 57% to 67%. However, according to the June 2018 School Performance dashboard, the proficiency average in state ELA results for students with IEPs in ICT classrooms in grades 3-5 is 2.08 (below city proficiency for this subgroup). According to the 2017-18 school quality snapshot, 100% of teachers indicated that they design instructional programs together. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through improving teacher collaboration on best practices in differentiated instruction, students with IEPs will demonstrate an increase in ELA proficiency by 8% from 2.08 to 2.25 (city benchmark) in ELA, as measured by the NYS ELA assessments. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The IEP teacher and the literacy coach will meet with ICT teachers and analyze student reading and writing data to plan differentiated instruction. Students with IEPs in ICT classes Administration will share with IEP Teacher, Literacy Coach, SETSS teacher, and ICT teachers Individual Student Reports (ISRs), indicating performance levels for all learning targets. Students with IEPs in ICT classes Biweekly, on Fridays, from Oct. 2018 to June 2019 IEP Teacher ICT Teachers Literacy Coach Oct. 2018 Administration 2018-19 CEP 24 Sept. 2018 IEP Teacher Students with IEPs in ICT classes IEP Teacher ICT Teachers SETSS Teacher Literacy Coach Literacy Coach IEP Teacher ICT Teachers IEP Teacher ICT Teachers IEP Teacher STEAM Teacher Assistant Principal ICT Teachers STEAM Teacher SEPJr PD Consultants A strategy bank will be created for specific differentiation strategies and tools to be utilized for small group instruction in the classroom. IEP Teacher will meet regularly with grade 3, 4, 5 ICT teams. All ICT teachers will participate in the SEPjr Cohort and receive ongoing instructional technology training. Students with IEPs in ICT classes Students with IEPs in ICT classes Students with IEPs in ICT classes Sept. 2018 to Nov. 2018 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 5 days PD in Aug. 2018 Continuation of teacher professional development in SEPJr cohort. Students with IEPs in ICT classes Nov. 2018 to June 2019 Students will have access to technology to improve the quality of their literacy skills through engaging in authentic culminating projects. IEP Teacher will create a schedule to push-in and teach small group instruction in Phonics and Reading Comprehension.  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach, and IEP teacher will create a video library that includes tutorial videos targeted at areas of academic literacy needs  Parent Coordinator and IEP Teacher will personally reach out to these “x” number of families to share ISR’s in order for parents to better understand their child’s performance on the ELA test, what the school is doing to help them, and share strategies and ways to support their children at home (to meet Literacy Coach and IEP teacher during November conferences). Literacy Coach will include target parent group in Test Prep workshops  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SPIRE Program (multisensory reading intervention program)   Up the Ladder TCRWP Alternate Units (designed to move students rapidly in writing)       Mentoring schedule for teachers with literacy coach to be created “If Then Curriculum Guide” for grades 3-5 Jen Seravello Guided Reading Kits Literacy Coach IEP Teacher Inter-visitation blocks for teachers to be created within school schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students with IEPs will demonstrate a 4% increase in ELA proficiency as measured by a mock ELA State Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock ELA Assessment compiled by Literacy Coach and IEP Teacher. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Quality Guide, 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. However, based on school wide teacher survey given in June 2018, 80.% of the teachers indicated that they feel they would benefit from more formal collaborative planning time and review of student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of block scheduling to facilitate teacher inter-visitations and daily grade level collaborations, teacher knowledge of content and pedagogy as measured by summative ratings in Advance in Component 1a will increase by 5% from 3.17 to 3.32. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will create Block Schedule so that all teachers will have daily common preps with their grade level colleagues. All Teachers Aug. 2018 Principal School leaders will hold IPC meetings with teachers to discuss individual ratings and plan for improved professional practice in 1a. These meetings will be conducted before October 1, 2018. A schedule of inter-visitation will be generated based off of the IPC meetings. Teachers will host and visit a minimum of two times; and a minimum of one visit before January 2019. Weekly school leadership meetings will be held to discuss, reflect, and share best practices to improve academic instruction and rigor. Assistant Principal District 3Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach All Teachers Sept. 2018 Principal All Teachers Nov. 2018 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Literacy Coach Math Coach All Teachers Weekly, Principal every Tuesday afternoons, Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal District 3Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach Literacy Coach Math Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  Through SLT meetings and minutes, parents will be able to be remain informed on the impact of this scheduling, and they will problem solve potential issues that may arise. Principal will share Advance percentages on knowledge of content and pedagogy with SLT. School administration will plan with subject area leaders/coaches in math and literacy for parent workshops that will focus on supporting parents in helping their child learn. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advance Program Shared Google Docs Math and literacy coaches funded by the PTA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-year, January 2019, a progress analysis of Advance ratings will indicate a 5% increase showing overall rating growth in domain ``1a from 3.17 to 3.32. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 quality review snapshot, 92% of parents say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. However, we believe that this data may not be representative of all programs, as only 61% of parents responded to the school survey. It is evident that there is an unequal distribution of parent involvement among programs (CSMA, French DL, Spanish DL). Collected data from curriculum night attendance, PTA meeting attendance, and parent representation on committees such as the SLT and PTA subcommittees shows that there is under representation of parents with children in the Computer Science Media Arts program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parental participation from our Computer Science Media Arts Program in PTA and school-wide events by 10%. , 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a comprehensive calendar of school-wide PTA events Create a comprehensive calendar of publishing parties. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? CSMA Parents CSMA Parents Sept. 2018 Parent Coordinator PTA Presidents August 2018 Parent Coordinator Literacy Coach CSAM Teachers Set two days of celebration on school calendar for CSMA tech expos. CSMA Parents Oct. 2018 STEAM Teacher Creation of parent outreach committee. Creation of a CSMA subcommittee in the PTA CSMA Parents CSMA Parents Create and disseminate a survey to collect data about the type of events that CSMA families are interested in. CSMA Parents Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 Parent Coordinator PTA Executive Board Sept. 2018 Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals Teachers Oct. 2018 STEAM Teacher Monitor parent attendance at PTA meetings by their child's class number CSMA Parents Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Provide parents with more opportunities to enable them to give PTA and SLT feedback. CSMA Nov. 2018 -June 2019 Parent Coordinator PTA Executive Board Parent Coordinator PTA Chairs SLT Chairs Teachers advertise events on Instagram accounts. CSMA Parents Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers 2018-19 CEP 30 Provide parents with translated handouts from Math and ELA curriculum workshops. CSMA Parents Nov. 2018 -2019 Parent Coordinator Translators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Google Surveys SLT committee Google Calendar Flyers Instagram School website Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, CSMA parent attendance will increase by 3% at PTA events from 4% to 7% and by 4% at publishing parties from 13% to 17%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sign-in sheets at PTA meetings Attendance sign-in sheets of parents at publishing parties 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -TC Assessments -Informal Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Reading Rescue (phonics, comprehension, decoding, encoding) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) -One-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -During the school day -One-to-one and small group (conferring notes, teacher observations -RTI Referral -Gift of Literacy -JCC(phonemic awareness) - Math End of Unit Assessments - Referrals from Guidance Counselor -Stephen Gaynor (phonemic awareness) -Reading Buddies (fluency) -Wilson Fundations(phonemic awareness) -SPIRE - a research-proven reading intervention program for your lowest performing students. -After school -One-to-one and small group -One-to-one -After school -During the school day -One- to- one -one to one;small group -During the school day -During the school day -During the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  -Estrellita-Spanish letter/sound phonemic awareness (K-2) -one to one; whole class; small group -During the school day - During the school day -During school (RTI) -During school day - LLI- Leveled Literacy Intervention - One-on-one -One-to-one and small group Small Group Focus in Mathematics -After school Mathematics -Unit Assessment -Exit Slips -RTI Referral -Informal Assessments - Bridges checkpoint assessments Math Olympiad Science -Amplify Assessments -Informal /Teacher observations After school ENL Academy -Science Club (content area reading, vocabulary, project-based learning) -Girls ScienceClub -Science Clinic -Robotics club for boys Small group -After school day -During school/lunch and after school -Small Group -Computer Based/Interactive Social Studies -Independent and small group projects -TC Reading and Writing Units of Study -Small Group -During the school day 2018-19 CEP 34  -Informal Assessments (content area reading and writing) -Computer based/interactive -Richard BluttalCurriculum Small Group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Teacher Observations - RTI Referral Passport SS -At-risk counseling (providing by Guidance Counselor) -Recommendations of the PPT - IEPteacher -Parent requests - SETSSteacher - AISteacher -On-site *THRIVE psychologist During the school day -During the school day * After school -One-to-one and small group 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 6 Students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  Free breakfast and lunch   Counseling  After school scholarships for day care and enrichment  Reading Buddies  Prioritization for remedial academic programs 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 39  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS.84 the Lillian Weber School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [PS 84 Lillian Weber School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association); ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication, PS84 App, PTA newsletter, Instagram, School Monthly Calendar blast, designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S.84 Lillian Weber, School-Parent Compact (SPC) in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 43  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Materials will be provided to support literacy and math enrichment as well as language and vocabulary acquisition and development. Given the importance of providing consistent, coherent, high quality and rigorous instruction to our second language learners, we will create an After school language Academy. Based on current data, this program will provide students with supplemental instruction in ENL/ELA and math. Additionally, this program will focus on increasing English language acquisition specifically through the development of concept formation, content area academic vocabulary, improving literacy skills (both in reading and writing) as well as integrating these skills into mathematics word problems, accountable talk and problem solving. Based on the results of the most recent NYSESLAT data, students consistently need to improve in the areas of reading and writing in order to reach minimum proficiency levels. In addition, based on 2018 ELA and Math test data, there is need for academic support for ELLs. On the ELA results, LEP proficiency on the ELA test was 50% compared to the school wide percentage of 53.3. For the Math assessment results, only 44% of LEPs scored a three or above, compared to the school percentage of 52%. To this end, there will be an additional focus on increasing English language acquisition in support of the skills and strategies needed for success on high stakes tests. We plan to implement an after school program to support ELLs. The academy will convene for 40 sessions beginning the week of November 14 and ending April 26. Sessions will be one hour in duration, from 3:00 PM to 4:00PM. The Academy will serve 50 students in Grades 1 through 5 . The targeted population will include those students in grades 1 through 5 who are mandated English Language Learners . The language of instruction will be English. A combination of ENL, TESOL certified, and general education (with a Bilingual Extension) teachers will be responsible for the instructional component. Fifty percent of instruction will be provided by ENL, TESOL certified, and/or general education (with a Bilingual Extension). Native language support will be supported as needed in Spanish and/or French since it is the ELL population of our school. Instructional planning design will be based on student entry points with an emphasis on individual areas of improvement (New comers and Transitional). Lessons will include both a language and content goal. Teachers will utilize a variety of ENL strategies and materials. Materials to be purchased are: . Instruction will be delivered in whole and small group sessions. Technology will be incorporated - Chrome books at no cost to Title III with books from ... Teachers will consistently look at student work to monitor and assess student progress, inform instruction, and design differentiated lessons based on student need. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All Teachers will participate in the following Professional Development Opportunities: Teachers will attend book study (study group) of Dual Language Essentials for teachers and administrators by Yvonne & David Freeman for a 6 week cycle beginning on November 5. Teachers that will participate are the Dual Language teachers (both French and Spanish), ENL teacher including the Title III teachers. It will take place during Mondays from 2:40 PM - 4:00 PM. Some topics will include: Dual Language Programs: Growth, Rationale, and Models - November 5 Teacher Essentials & Whole School Essentials - November 12 Curriculum Goals, Planning, and Implementation Essentials - November 26 Teachers are provided with opportunities to turn key all relevant information with appropriate staff members during afternoon professional learning time. Throughout the year during professional conference days, and teacher team meetings, teachers will participate in school based professional development focusing ENL strategies. These PD opportunities help support teachers plan differentiated instruction, as they enable teachers to keep in mind the end goals for students as indicated by the New York State Standards. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Research indicates that parent involvement is a strong indicator of student achievement. At PS 84, parents have multiple opportunities to strengthen the school/home connection. The Dual Language Committee is open to all parents of second language learners. Parents, teachers and administrators meet to discuss school related topics regarding all aspects of second language acquisition and instruction. A variety of parent workshops will be offered. Topics and dates .... For the After School Academy Program parents will be invited to an orientation meeting of the Title III program outlining the goals and support strategies for ELL students. The workshop will be provided by the ENL teacher at no cost Title III. The workshop will be on November 7, 2018 at 8:30 AM - 10:00 AM. How to support ELL students at home for the NYS Exams? This workshop will be provided by the Literacy and Math coaches. It will take place on December 11, 2018 at 8:30 AM - 10:00 AM. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Supporting your ELL/DL child on their way to middle school. This workshop will be presented by the guidance counselor and Assistant Principal. Workshop is provided in Spanish and French. It will take place on November 20, 2018 at 8:30 AM - 10:00 AM. Parents are invited via backpack letter and all correspondence is in Spanish and French as needed. During workshops, translation and interpretation services are provided. Parents will also be provided with refreshments ($250.00) during all Title III workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9704.00 N/A $2,412  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After School ELL Academy: 4 tchrs x 40 hrs x $60.65= $9,704 N/A Materials and supplies to support the ELL After School Program. Writing journals Chrome books 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. BrainPOP in English N/A Parent engagement refreshments $250.00 $12,366 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A $250.00 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Lillian Weber School Borough Manhattan School Number 84 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Evelyn J. Lolis Coach Celine Beloeil ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Layla Lyngstad Teacher/Subject Area Sonia Medrano/ 4 th Grade Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Hincapie/3rd Grade Related-Service Provider Annie Li Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Mary Acosta Coach Laura Maruska School Counselor Jessi Wisoff Parent Martin Wallace Parent Coordinator Anita Hauschild Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 12 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 700 Total number of ELLs 54 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.71% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): French Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 4 K 1 2008 1998 French Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 11 6 0 17 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All interim assessments as well as all other data indicate that reading/writing develops slower than listening/speaking therefore instructional decisions are made to increase opportunities for time on task for reading/writing. Content area curriculum instruction must insure that prior knowledge is activated for ELL's, so they can comprehend content and material. Prior knowledge is assessed for individual students through the Teachers College Reading and Writing assessment tools. The skills assessed through this tool include letter and sound knowledge concepts about print, vocabulary, word , spelling, site words, decoding and comprehension. Data can be accessed through Teachers College Assessment Pro on line. ELL students' current teachers have access to prior years assessment . Based on each students' results, instructional guidelines and supports are recommended for both school and home use. In addition to TC assessments, the LAB-R and the NYSESLAT data are used for grouping and ESL instruction. In our DL program we use EDL II for our Spanish DL program and GB+ by Beauchemin for our 2018-19 CEP 54  French DL program. The results of these assessment tools inform classroom instruction in Spanish/French by identifying students' strengths and weaknesses. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our literacy coach supports teachers in instruction and assessment. Teachers meet weekly to review and analyze student work and then plan for next steps in providing needed individualized support. We also use the Assessment Pro database to help track students' reading level data. We have an ENL teacher that assesses and monitors all ENL students. Students' classroom teachers are also provided with assessment resources for our Bridges program to monitor student progress in mathematics. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by measuring the data from NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, AYP. EDL 2, GB+ by Beauchemin as well as classroom teacher assessments. The administration, ENL teacher, classroom teachers meet periodically to discuss areas of success and areas that may require improvement and discuss different strategies to improve said areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During the school year, there are data meetings between administration and teachers to review student assessment data. ENL students are carefully monitored to ensure that they are making progress toward meeting state expected levels of progress in all subject areas. If and when data reveal that a student is not making progress, even after Tier I intervention services are provided, students at risk of not meeting the expected progress are referred to our PPT. During PPT meetings, student profiles are individually reviewed and action plans are determined through consensus of the PPT. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 84 uses the data to guide instruction within the RTI frame work in Tier 1, ELLs participate in a rigorous and evidence based curriculum, where the ESL teachers pushes in with the classroom teacher. If the students are showing signs of needing extra support, they are given extra attention ("Tier 2") through invitations to Extended Day, increased small group work, and additional activities to core instruction. Should ELLs continue to need supports above Tier 2, Intensive Intervention is introduced, where students are pulled in small groups or 1:1 for intensive and individualized instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the Data on the NYSESLAT, it is revealed that the students have made growth. The majority of students have consistently met their yearly measurable growth across the grades. The area that students across the grades need to focus on is writing. The acquisition of speaking and listening skills appears to progress quicker throughout the grade and proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use teacher PD time to analyze assessment data among grade level and vertical teams. Teachers look at data and determine where students struggle and then brainstorm and share resources to support student remedial instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 55  a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL instruction is delivered by the dually certified (Common Branches and TESOL) ENL teacher. Students are grouped by grade and by level for the stand alone instructional component. Entering and emergent students from the dual language also receive their required stand alone minutes from the ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Students in the dual language program are grouped by grade. Their proficiency levels vary within each grade. Entering and Emerging students in the French/Spanish dual language classes receive their stand alone ENL instruction from the ENL teacher by pullout. The remaining 180/ 90 minutes are delivered by the French/ Spanish Dual Language teachers during classroom instruction. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school delivers ENL instructional minutes via the mandates of 360 weekly minutes for entering and emerging students and 180 per week for transitioning and expanding students through our dually certified ENL teacher, who has 6 periods available daily to meet these mandates. The ENL students are pulled out for Stand alone ENL instruction (180 minutes for entering 90/ 180 for emerging)in addition to daily integrated instruction in their classroom, and 180 minutes for transitioning/expanding), in order to meet these mandates. Entering and emerging students are seen by the ENL teacher for two periods a day (50 minutes stand alone- 50 minutes integrated ELA). Transitioning students are seen for four 50-minute periods in their classroom for integrated instruction by the ENL and classroom teacher during reading, writing, or social studies/science. ELA support is embedded into ENL instructional times. The content area and ENL teachers collaborate and co-plan in advance regarding lessons. Students practice journal writing and essay writing several times a week, as well as engage in group activities such as book clubs and guided reading. The ENL teacher provides instruction in Balanced Literacy (writing and reading workshop, shared reading and guided reading), phonics, science, social studies and grammar. Students also learn reading strategies (drawing conclusions, sequencing and cause and effect). ESL methodologies such as Total Physical Response and scaffolding are implemented in addition to balanced literacy strategies (writing and reading workshops and guided reading) to develop Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills and Cognitive Academic Language. Higher order thinking skills for content area learning is used as part of the instructional approach. Students engage in collaborative group work and cooperative learning experiences. They are immersed in lessons that provide explicit instruction in the structure of English, building background knowledge,vocabulary and oral language. The ESL teacher provides books, glossaries, and dictionaries in the students' Native language to help them learn in the content areas. When possible, students are also grouped in partnerships with students speaking the same language. The Dual Language program uses a 50:50 instructional model in a heterogeneously grouped class (proficiency level and language), in which the amount of instructional time is equally divided between the two languages at each grade level by one certified teacher. The certified Dual Language teacher delivers the mandated ENL instruction of 360 minutes for entering and emergent ELLs as well as the 180 minutes for transitioning and expanding ELLs. The goals for both EPs and ELLs in the dual language program are as follows: Students will develop proficiency in their first/native language. Students will develop proficiency in their second language. Students will develop positive cross-cultural attitudes, behaviors and skills that will help them function and navigate in a global society. Students will attain higher levels of self-esteem and confidence. The students will also meet or exceed CCL standards. The Dual Language teachers use effective practices and strategies, such as collaborative teacher planning that taps in to the learners’ prior knowledge in both content areas and language acquisition, and which reflects the learners’ interest. Lessons focus on challenging ENL learners to go beyond what they know. ELLs and EP students receive content-area instruction for 50 2018-19 CEP 56  percent of the academic week in English and 50 percent in the other language (French/Spanish) in grades K-4 (alternating day model). Students are expected to build academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language via authentic literature, songs, trips and thematic instruction. ELLs and EP students are linguistically integrated for all content instruction in all grades K-5. The students are expected to comprehend, speak, read, and write in both languages upon their completion of a Dual Language program in 5th grade. In the Dual Language program, Language Arts is taught daily in the language of the day. Content area is taught in both English and Spanish/French, using second-language acquisition strategies such as,TPR, labeling, glossaries, and scaffolding of the target language. 3.The ENL teacher provides instruction in Balanced Literacy (writing and reading workshops,guided reading) phonics, math, science ,social studies, and grammar. Students also learn reading strategies (ie drawing conclusions, sequencing,cause and effect) which helps them in their mainstream classroom. ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response and scaffolding are implemented in addition to balanced literacy strategies (writing and reading workshops, shared reading guided reading) to develop Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Higher order thinking skills for content area learning is used as part of the instructional approach. Students engage in collaborative learning experiences. They are immersed in lessons that provide explicit instruction in the structure of English, building background knowledge, vocabulary and oral language. ESL materials used by the teacher include big books, an array of fiction and non fiction books, and games. All instructional materials strengthen the ELLs' needs across the content areas. 4. In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language(Spanish) in grades K-5 the teachers use the EDL II. In grades K-5, on an annual basis, the students take the ELE Exam. Teachers of K-5 in French use the GB+ by Beauchemin. These are in addition to the teachers' daily conferences ,observations, and assessments of students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELA support is embedded into ESL instructional times. The content area and ESL teachers collaborate in advance regarding lesson planning. Students practice journal writing and essay writing several times a week as well as engage in group activities such as book clubs and guided reading. The ESL teacher provides instruction in Balanced Literacy(writing and reading workshop, shared reading and guided reading), phonics, science, social studies and grammar. Students also learn reading, strategies(drawing conclusions, sequencing and cause and effect) ESL methodologies such as Total Physical Response and scaffolding are implemented in addition to balanced literacy strategies,writing and reading workshops and guided reading)to develop Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills and Cognitive Academic Language. Higher Order thinking skills for content area learning is used as part of the instructional approach. Students engage in collaborative group work and cooperative learning experiences. They are immersed in lessons that provide explicit instruction in the structure of English,building background knowledge,vocabulary and oral language. The ESL teacher provides books,glossaries and dictionaries in the students Native language to help them learn their content areas. When possible, students are also grouped in partnerships with students speaking the same language. The Dual Language teachers use effective practices and strategies, such as effective teacher planning that taps in to the learners’ prior knowledge in both content and language, that reflects the learners’ interest, and challenges the learners to go beyond what they know. ELLs and EP students receive content-area instruction for 50 percent of the academic week in English and 50 percent in the other language (French/Spanish) in grades K-4 (alternating day model). Students are expected to build academic skills in their first language and eventually transfer these skills to the second language via authentic literature, songs, trips and thematic instruction. ELLs and EP students are linguistically integrated for all content instruction in all grades K-4. The students are expected to comprehend, speak, read, and write in both languages upon their completion of a Dual Language program in 5th grade. In the Dual Language program, Language Arts is taught daily in the language of the day. Content area is taught in both English, using second-language acquisition strategies such as, TPR, labeling, glossaries, scaffolding, and the target language. 2018-19 CEP 57  The ESL teacher provides instruction in Balanced Literacy (writing and reading workshops,guided reading) phonics, math, science,social studies, and grammar. Students also learn reading strategies (ie drawing conclusions, sequencing,cause and effect) which helps them in their mainstream classroom. ESL methodologies such as Total Physical Response and scaffolding are implemented in addition to balanced literacy strategies (writing and reading workshops, shared reading guided reading) to develop Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Higher order thinking skills for content area learning is used as part of the instructional approach. Students engage in collaborative learning experiences. They are immersed in lessons that provide explicit instruction in the structure of English, building background knowledge, vocabulary and oral language. ESL materials used by the teacher include big books,an array of fiction and non fiction books and games. All instructional materials strengthen the ELLs needs across the content areas 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language(Spanish) in grades K-5 the teachers use the EDL II. In grades 3-5, on an annual basis, the students take the ELE Exam. Teachers of K-5 in French use the GB+ by Beauchemin. These are in addition to the teachers' daily conferences ,observations, and assessments of students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently P.S. 84 has no SIFE students but in the event that we admit SIFE students we will provide services including extended day, small group instruction, native language instruction (French, Spanish), AIS in math, reading buddies, as well as tutoring. b. ELL students who have been in US schools less than three years (newcomers) receive instruction based on their mandated needs. Instruction focuses on the development of both social and academic language to ensure comprehension of all content area instruction in order to better understand and support their social and emotional learning and use of language. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher and together develops scaffolding strategies (modeling, bridging, contextualization) to help enhance students' learning. The ENL teacher teacher provides the students with test sophistication strategies . Students also receive extra support from additional resources such as reading buddies, high school volunteers, after school programs, and extended day programs. All students testing will be in compliance with all testing accommodations. c. ELLs receiving services from 4-6 years are immersed in lessons that provide explicit instruction based on accumulated data to develop social and academic language simultaneously while, building background knowledge and academic vocabulary. Those students that need additional support in developing writing and/or reading strategies are provided with a stronger focus in these areas. Through small group instruction and one on one conferencing, the ENL teacher works on developing academic English using literacy strategies and activities. Similar support is given in all content areas. d. PS 84 currently does not have any students who have been ELLs in NYC schools for longer than 6 years but in the event that we do, we will provide them with mandated ENL services as well as additional support from the ENL teacher. AIS will also be provided in math and ELA.We will also purchase instructional materials that will support their specific needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs at PS 84 are considered for academic services based on teacher recommendations and parent requests, regardless of their ELL status. All ELLs are served in self contained, ICT and general education classes maintaining the integrity of their IEP mandates. Teachers of ELL-SWD's use various instructional materials and strategies throughout the grades that provide access to academic content areas, and also accelerate English language development. Students in all grades receive small group instruction and scaffolding through guided reading. In addition, grades K-2 use Fundations, Levelled Literacy Intervention, and authentic literature through Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop. 2018-19 CEP 58  In grades 3-5, the Wilson Program and authentic literature through Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop. Throughout the grades both the ENL teacher and the classroom teachers use ESL strategies such as; scaffolding, graphic organizers, realia and Total Physical Response. In grades 3-5 Everyday Math games, and math word walls are used to reinforce academic language. Grades K-2 uses Investigations which includes a differentiation option to meet the diverse needs of ELLs and IEP students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher collaborates with the Special Education Teachers and related services providers (occupational therapy, speech, physical therapy, and counseling) to ensure that the students' IEP goals are met. In order to provide maximum instruction and meet the students' needs, the ENL teacher pushes into the students' classrooms. Language instruction is aligned to the curriculum using strategies such as flexible grouping, scaffolding, as well as multi-sensory instructional tools (labeling, color coding, repetition) to increase language development and comprehensible input. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Interventions for ELLs vary according to proficiency level and grade. Students in K-2 are offered Fundations for phonemic awareness and reading skills. Fundations may also be used for beginner proficiency level ELLs in upper grades. The Leveled Literacy Intervention program is also used in K-2 grades, but may also be used with a beginners in grades 3-4. Wilson Reading Program is used for upper grades (3-5) as a reading intervention. In addition to these programs, students are placed in guided reading or strategy groups based on individual needs. ELL students participate in extended day programs that target ELA and math. In addition, reading buddies, programs provided through an outside organization of trained volunteers from the J.C.C. (Jewish Community Council), Gift of Literacy, Great Leaps. and Saturday Academy is offered for ELLs. Currently we are exploring Max Scholar, a reading/phonics/writing computer program for our ELL students. The ENL teacher also has a flexible extended day group to provide targeted and focused instruction. The dual language teachers also provide students with extended day assistance. Students may receive extra interventions by the dual language teacher in either their native language or English, depending on the students needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 84 will continue with Saturday Academy for the ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Equal Access is afforded to all ELLs by inclusion into mainstream classrooms, self contained special education classes, integrated collaborative teaching classes, and all related services. ENL students are included and participate in all school programs and activities during and after school. PS 84 has many arts programs including City Center, Alvin Ailey, MAgic Box Productions, New York Historical Society Grant funded programs, and keyboarding and/or band instruction that take place during school hours. All our after school programs are inclusive and enrollment is open to all PS 84 students including ELLS. We also offer a part time after school program SENY that is fully bilingual (Spanish). Community based after school programs such as Oasis, EFNY, YMCA and Goddard Riverside programs are also offered. After school community reading programs such as the Gift of Literacy and Steven Gaynor are also offered for ELL participation. In order to insure ELL participation, translated notices are sent home. In addition our bilingual Spanish-speaking assistant principals, our parent Coordinator is available to assist parents with enrolling in these programs. Our school website also keeps parents abreast of activities occurring at PS 84, and the website may be translated online into multiple languages. 2018-19 CEP 59  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Both the classroom and ENL teachers work collaboratively and use a variety of instructional materials across the content areas to support ELLs. Core Curriculum materials in Science and Social Studies are used in the classroom by both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher using integrated instruction uses the classroom materials such as iPads, textbooks (Mathematics & Social Studies), big books, glossaries, dictionaries, and fiction and non-fiction books to support language acquisition. All classes are scheduled on a weekly basis into the computer lab to support language development through the use of technology. The technology teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher supports the ELLs by scaffolding instruction and using websites in the ELLs native language when available. Dictionaries (word for word) and glossaries (Science, and mathematics) are available in all classrooms to support native language and English language development. Dictionaries and glossaries are also available in students' native language. In K-2 grades, the students use Bridges for Mathematics. In grades 3-5, students learn with the same Bridges program, as well as Exemplars. In literacy, students use fiction and non-fiction books to support the units of study in Teachers College Reading and Writing Methodology. In Science, the school uses trade books in both Spanish and English. Students with other languages are supported through translations done by the classroom teacher in collaboration with the ENL teacher. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in the ENL program by providing students with dictionaries and glossaries in their native language to help translate content and academic vocabulary when needed. A variety of native language fiction and non-fiction books are in all classrooms with ELLs . To further support ELLs, the native language students are grouped whenever possible with other ELLs with similar native languages. In dual language classes, leveled libraries (Fiction and non-fiction) in both French and Spanish are provided to support native language. Fiction and non-fiction trade books are also used for instruction in science, social studies, mathematics and reading in the French and Spanish Dual Language classes. The Teachers College Reading and Writing units of study are translated into French and Spanish. Native language is supported in the Dual Language classes through small group instruction, guided reading, read-alouds, etc… in the students' native language whenever possible. All mathematics materials Bridges are in Spanish and English and translated problems are generated for students in the French Dual Language classes. Teachers translate all information for instruction and homework. ELL students also utilize the games component of the program to further support conceptual learning. In Science, glossaries are used to support the native language for instruction. In Social Studies, Core Curriculum materials are ordered in both Spanish and English. And in the French Dual Language classes, teachers continually translate all texts. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required Services and resources correspond to our students' ages and grade levels accordingly. The ENL teacher pushes into the students classrooms during integrated teaching and and uses age/grade appropriate materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Both the classroom and ENL teachers work collaboratively and use a variety of instructional materials across the content areas to support ELLs. Core Curriculum materials in Science and Social Studies are used in the classroom by both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher using integrated instruction uses the classroom materials such as i pads, textbooks (Mathematics & Social Studies), big books, glossaries, dictionaries, fiction and non-fiction books to support language acquisition. All classes are scheduled on a weekly basis into the computer lab to support language development through the use of technology. The technology teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher supports the ELLs by scaffolding his instruction and using websites in the ELLs native language when available. Dictionaries (word for word) and glossaries (Science, and mathematics) are available in all classrooms to support native language and English language development. Dictionaries and glossaries are also available in students' native language. In K-2 grade the students use Investigations for Mathematics. In grades 3-5 students use Investigations, Context for Learning and Georgia Math and Go Math (Spanish and English copies), in literacy students use fiction and non-fiction books to support the units of studying Reading and 2018-19 CEP 60  Writing, in Science the school uses Harcourt's blended model with workbooks & trade books in both Spanish and English. Students with other languages are supported through translations done by the classroom teacher in collaboration with the ENL teacher. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELLs are invited to tour the school and meet the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher. Parents are informed of the programs offered at PS 84. Parents are also given the opportunity to meet with the principal, assistant principals, and the parent coordinator. During Orientation, parents are informed of PS 84's school website where more information can be accessed. Translators are available upon request. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, PS 84 is using the side by side model only for the French dual language program in grades K-2.The ELLs AND EPs are integrated with one another (native French speakers and native English) for all instruction, aside from stand alone ENL instruction (which varies by student's level). Content is taught in both languages. Stand alone ENL is delivered by the ENL teacher where the students are grouped with other ELLs from their grade/proficiency level. The instructional model used for the French dual language grades 3-5 and the Spanish K-5 dual language program is self contained. Our self contained model is 100% integrated. No content areas are taught separately. All EPs and ELLs are integrated all day from 8:30 A.M. - 2:50 P.M. In the self contained DL classes, one teacher teaches both English and the second language. All specials like art, music, gym, computers and math are taught in English only. c. The classroom teacher provides all instruction in both languages in the Dual Language program. Instruction is divided by days: Mondays, Wednesdays and half days on Friday instruction is in English all day , Tuesdays, Thursdays and half days on Friday instruction is in the 2nd language (French or Spanish)in grades K-5all day. In K and 1st grades Mondays, and Wednesday instruction is in English all day and Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays instruction is in Spanish or French all day except for the cluster instruction (Art, Music, Gym, etc…). d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously.Both Languages are taught simultaneously in the Dual Language program. 2018-19 CEP 61  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff such as the ENL teacher and dual language teachers are scheduled to attend workshops at Teachers College that address reading and writing strategies that assist in the teaching and planning of the ELL population. They also attend OELL workshops and DOE Network workshops. In addition to the workshops attended at Teachers College, The OELL and the DOE Network offer workshops for the teachers of ELLs throughout the content areas. These workshops are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and are specifically designed for ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The fifth grade teachers and the Assistant Principal, Mary Acosta, meet and discuss how they can assist ELLs that are transitioning to middle schools. The assistant principal also meets with the parents to inform them of the middle school applications, choices and procedures . The teachers of ELLs at PS 84 meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2- 15% for all teachers and 50% of total hours for the ENL/dual language teachers by scheduling them for ELL specific workshops through Teacher's College and OELL the Office of English Language Learners.. Agenda's and hours are kept by the teachers and the hours are maintained by the office/administration. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the original Parent Orientation meeting, parents are informed that they will meet with the ENL teacher or their child's dual language teacher individually during the school year to discuss their child's language development progress. These meetings will be scheduled on Tuesdays during parent engagement time or at the parents' convenience. If the a parent requires translation beyond what we offer at PS 84, the translation unit will be contacted to provide the service. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order for ELLs to achieve proficiency in English, parent involvement is crucial. P.S. 84 offers several workshops to parents of ELLs to provide parent assistance to ensure their child's social and academic success. On sight ESL classes are offered to our ELL parents in addition to Spanish/French classes. P.S. 84 has a very active and involved PTA that include cross cultural activities and events to ensure an inclusive environment.There are a large variety of committees such as, Gardening, Dual Language, PTA, Wellness, Cultural Arts, SLT, Fund raising, and many more that offer parent involvement opportunities to all parents including ELL parents. All PTA communications are translated in French and Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 62  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Evelyn J. Lolis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Evelyn J. Lolis Title Principal Mary Acosta Assistant Principal Anita Hauschild Parent Coordinator Layla Lyngstad ENL/Bilingual Teacher Martin Wallace Parent Sonia Medrano/4th Grade Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Hincapie Teacher/Subject Area Laura Maruska Coach Coach Jessi Wisoff School Counselor Ilene Altschul Maria Broughton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 0M84 School Name: The Lillian Weber School Superintendent: IleneAltschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Laila Mary Lyngstad Acosta ENL Teacher Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the language preferences of PS 84's parent community for both written and oral communication, data is reviewed from the Home Language Report (RHLA), and the RPOB report on ATS to identify the home languages spoken. In addition to this review, our ENL teacher maintains a spreadsheet that indicates the parents home language and preferred language of communication that was gathered after reviewing Part III of the home language Identification Survey (HLIS). In addition, each classroom teacher sends home a translation necessity survey to prepare for Parent Teacher Conference needs. Emergency cards that are stored in the main office, are created in the preferred written language and indicate the parents preferred contact language. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language PS 84 is a Dual Language French/Spanish school. We have 100 French speaking parents of students. All of the parents are bilingual English or French speakers and have indicated that they are comfortable with written/ oral communication to be in either English or French. Often times, the parents will speak French with the French teacher, but need no translation assistance to speak with the English speaking staff. Many of our 76 Spanish speaking parents are also bilingual and have indicated that they are comfortable receiving written and oral communication in English or Spanish.However,15 of the 76 require Spanish translation in both written and oral communication. O Other parent languages spoken are: 1 Albanian, 1 German, 8 Russian, 1 Slovakian, 1 Swedish, 1 Serbo-Croatian, 3 Chinese,1 Portuguese, 2 Polish, 1 Hausa, 1 Turkish. All of these parents chose English as their preferred language of communication. Fortunately, we are able to deal with our translation needs in house as we have pedagogues that speak Spanish and French. We have found that one parent speaks English and translates to their spouse if needed and has declined the offer of our school acquiring translation assistance from the Translation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish French 2018-19 CEP 67  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents News Letters: throughout 2017/18 Recess/Holiday Notifications: throughout 2017/18 Parent Coordinator Calendar: 2017/18 NYS Testing Schedule: Spring 2017/18 Parent Teacher Conferences: Fall 2017 and Spring 2018 to parents. NYS 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences Fall 2017/Spring 2018 Individual parent meetings: Movie Night Throughout the year Curriculum Night Fall 2017 September, 2017 2018-19 CEP 68  Phone conferences: Principal Coffee Club ongoing throughout 2017/18 Monthly 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All literature will be available in the main office for parents. The LAC/ Parent Coordinator will distribute key information/documents to LEP parents. The Welcome Poster is on display in the entrance of PS 84. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 84 will develop and utilize a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. These surveys will be reviewed and needed adjustments will be made to assist parents. Surveys will be translated into needed languages 2018-19 CEP 69 
