2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M116 School Name: P.S. 116 MARY LINDLEY MURRAY Principal: JANE HSU 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 116 The Mary Lindley Murray School 310200010116 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 02M116 210 East 33 rd Street, Manhattan, NY 10016 (212) 685-4366 (212) 696-1009 Phone Number: Fax: Gary Shevell gshevel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Email Address: Jane Hsu Andrea LaRocca ChriscelynTussey/Terry Pennacchia Andrea LaRocca N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, 7 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3739 Phone Number: (212) 356-3702 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 705-5856 Phone Number: (718) 923-5146 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jane Hsu Andrea LaRocca ChriselynTussey N/A N/A N/A TamaraKromholz StacyLessen Lauren Powell Erica Schulman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Gary Shevell Tammy Creaven Stacy Spence SepidehMehri Amy Gaspari MeeraWagman Mauro Pennacchia Position and Constituent Group Represented Assistant Principal Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 116’s vision of a community of learners extends beyond the classroom community to encompass the grade and the school as a whole. We recognize that children learn a tremendous amount from their peers as well as by working with younger or older children. Therefore, teachers not only promote relationships among classes on the grade level, but also forge bonds across the grades. In addition, P.S. 116 strengthens respect for community by involving children’s 2018-19 CEP 9  extended families, members of the neighborhood, and the broader community in school activities. Our families play a vital role by supporting their children’s endeavors and by actively supporting the school’s mission. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school, P.S. 116, is a community of learners in which all children are encouraged to achieve high academic standards and social success, to enjoy learning, to celebrate diversity, to develop analytical skills, and to model exemplary behavior. We empower our students to take responsibility for their own learning by recognizing that effort leads to academic success. They are active participants and every child has a responsibility not just to perform a task, but to do it to the best of her or his ability. We emphasize the basic virtues of respect, compassion, perseverance, honesty, and commitment to character building. In order for children to excel, they require an environment that encourages them to take risks in their learning. All members of P.S. 116’s community work together to create a nurturing environment so that students can take risks without anxiety, can think critically, can ask questions about their learning and their world, and can celebrate each other’s successes. The foundation of academic instruction from kindergarten through fifth grade at P.S. 116 is a standards-based, integrated curriculum, designed by our teachers, staff developers, and administrators. In-depth units of study occur in classrooms for sufficient amounts of time to ensure that all children master the content and internalize the material. During a unit, we study the core curriculum, which includes language arts, math, science, and social studies. We infuse into the core curriculum the specialty areas of art, music, dance/movement, storytelling, drama, computer technology, and physical education. Our faculty recognizes that children are unique learners and, therefore, our teaching styles encompass all modes of learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 116 strives to meet the needs of students who come from a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds and a variety of academic and social experiences not experienced by most schools. Our students’ home addresses vary from the upper echelon apartments of 5th and Park Avenues to the low-income, subsidized NYC Housing Authority apartments of East 28th Street. Additionally, we proudly serve as the neighborhood school for a large number of students who live in nearby temporary housing facilities, as well as with children of United Nations diplomats. Due to the circumstances of these two types of families, it is very common for students from either group to attend our school for short periods of time (sometimes just a few weeks) before relocating. However, no matter how long (or short) a child might be enrolled at P.S. 116, we are committed to helping that student make progress in all areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Two ongoing initiatives have been to lift the engagement level of all learners within the framework of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and to build leadership capacity within the faculty. The school’s last Quality Review Report (2014-15) indicates a well-developed school in every category, including those that address student engagement and shared leadership.“ P.S. 116’s school's relentless focus on student independence and agency demands high levels of expectation around everyone's contributions to achieving this vision, and school leaders 2018-19 CEP 10  provide a support to students, families, and staff in order to ensure their success. The school staff has a collective commitment to ongoing professional collaboration, focusing together on meeting the needs of students, and elevating their practice and leadership, both individually and communally.” 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M116 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 539 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 16 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 36.0% % Attendance Rate 31.4% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 20.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 40.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 79 79 15 94.5% 4.1% 16.5% 11.7% 20.8% 6.9% 2 5% 7.1 66.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to P.S. 116’s 2014-15 Quality Review Report, “ Across all classrooms, teaching practices reflect the school's unified beliefs and the needs of individual learners are met to the degree that the majority of students are producing work that demonstrates high levels of thinking.” Additionally, “The school implements coherent, integrated and comprehensive curricula in all subjects that are rigorous, reflective of high standards, and provide flexibility to meet the needs of all learners.” Needs: After comparing the 2018 CCLS ELA state exam scores with students’ Fountas & Pinnell reading levels, teachers continue to notice a strong correlation between the two metrics, concluding that reading levels are a strong indicator of how students will score on state exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of level 1 and 2 readers in grades 1–5 will improve at least one performance level, with 70% of level 2 readers progressing reading levels while remaining within the performance level band as assessed by both Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records assessments (grades 1-2), and Scholastic’s In-book Independent Reading Assessment in grades 3-5. 2018-19 CEP 13 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will identify lowest performing students and develop customized skill instruction for small group and one-on-one settings. Teachers will meet regularly with target population and lead interactive read aloud, guided and/or shared reading, teaching multiple comprehension skills within each session. They will use a series of questions and prompts to challenge students cognitively, promote meta-cognition and advance high-level thinking and discourse. Professional Development will be provided to teachers on the following topics: a. Guided Reading b. Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching: Teacher Effectiveness Rubric 3c – Engaging Students in Learning c. Shared Reading d. Interactive Read-Aloud e. Features of the various Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. Targeted students who are at risk of not meeting academic expectations will receive additional interventions. Intervention will be provided by the reading recovery teachers, the Special Education Teacher Support Service (SETSS) provider, the English as a Second Language (ESL) teacher, and select specialty teachers. Paraprofessionals and Teaching Assistants will be trained in Reading Rescue to support at risk students’ (grades 1–2) fluency, comprehension and language development skills. Lowest performing students in grades 1–5 September 2018–June 2019 Classroom teachers September 2018-June, 2019 At-risk readers, grades 1-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, grades 1–5 teachers, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project literacy staff developer Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project literacy staff developers, in- house teacher leaders. Principal, Assistant Principal, grades 1–5 teachers, intervention specialist, key specialty teachers, select paraprofessionals and teaching assistants Classroom teachers, reading recovery/intervention teachers Classroom and reading recovery teachers will provide information sessions and timely literature on reading fluency, comprehension, and the comprehension skills needed to master each reading level. The sessions will also relay the importance of nightly reading, the importance of literacy in the home, and how families can best support their children as readers. Families September 2018-June 20189 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  Classroom and reading recovery teachers will provide information sessions and timely literature on reading fluency, comprehension, and the comprehension skills needed to master each reading level. The sessions will also relay the importance of nightly reading, the importance of literacy in the home, and how families can best support their children as readers. Additionally, on the first and third Friday of every month the school will host "Families as Buddies," an opportunity for families to join their students for instruction. In this way, teachers can communicate to and model for families how to engage in productive, engaging book discussions with their children that promote the goals of the CCLS. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Multiple common preps will be scheduled for each grade-level team to ensure opportunities for training and analyzing reading data. ● Highly qualified Reading Recovery and reading intervention teachers will support teachers in meeting this goal. ● Teacher per session will be scheduled to hold extended-day instruction for students in meeting this goal; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Grade-level teams, grades 1-5, will meet at three times during the school year (November, January, March) to review data and monitor progress toward this goal. By January, 2019, we expect that 20% of level 1 and 2 readers in grades 1–5 will demonstrate progress of at least 50% towards moving an achievement level for that grade level as measured by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records, and in-book assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Teachers College Reading and Writing Program (TCRWP) running records assessments (grades 1-2),  Scholastic’s in-book Independent Reading Assessment in grades 3-5. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Social and emotional well-being within a supportive school environment is critical if students are to truly attain positive academic outcomes. Learning to focus, sustain motivation, to handle the frustrations associated with difficult tasks, and sharing, learning, and communicating with peers, are skills that depend on the ability to understand and manage emotions. Because of this important link, P.S. 116's faculty have been studying and engaging in mindfulness practices with the students of P.S. 116 during the past four (2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18) school years. A review of June 2017 teacher survey data around the implementation of mindfulness practices indicates that 40% of the teachers practiced mindfulness daily with their students, yet 78% of the teachers indicated that their classroom environment was more peaceful and calm. Additionally, over 40% of the teachers indicated that students showed a reduction in stress, were better able to focus, and demonstrated a higher ability to self-regulate. This data clearly indicates that a greater emphasis on mindfulness practices can further enhance classroom environments and have a positive impact on more students' emotional well-being. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in mindfulness practices with their students on a daily basis as indicated by student and teacher surveys. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development will be provided to teachers by The Inner Resilience Program on the benefits of mindful practices and ways to incorporate mindfulness into their daily classroom structures and routines. Teachers will be led through mindfulness activities, professional study, and encouraged to practice mindfulness for themselves as a means to demonstrate a mindful existence for their students. Additionally, best practices will be shared in and among teachers. Materials will be provided to teachers, (i.e., videos, audio files, etc...) to help teachers initiate regular, consistent mindful activities with their students. All teachers and paraprofessionals All teachers and paraprofessionals September, 2018 through June 2019 Linda Lantierri, Principal, Assistant Principal September, 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Professional Development Committee All teachers September, 2018 through June 2019 September, 2018 through June 2019 Linda Lantierri, Principal, Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor, Principal, Assistant Principal Targeted mindfulness practice for specific subgroups will be provided to students (Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, students identified as at-risk). These practices include calming and breathing exercises, strategies for centering and focus, and lessons designed to heighten both social and emotional intelligence. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, At-Risk Learners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The first and third Friday of every month the school will host "Families as Buddies," an opportunity for families to join their students for instruction. This instruction will include mindfulness practices occurring in the classroom so families can experience, first hand, the types of mindfulness activities their children engage in in school and the strategies being taught. Additionally, as part of our school's annual "Healthy Lifestyles" evening, held in the Spring, specific sessions will be devoted to mindfulness where parents will have the opportunity to hear from Linda Lantierri, and experts in the field of mindfulness education, and engage in mindful activities for themselves. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  10 Monday professional development time sessions will be utilized to conduct whole-staff Professional Development sessions with Linda Lantierri  An additional allotment of Monday professional development sessions will be utilized to conduct professional study around the topic of mindfulness, led by members of the school's professional Development Committee.  Guidance Counselor will utilize a portion of her "at-risk" time to meet with small groups of identified students to further practice and discuss mindfulness. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The staff will meet 3 times during the school year (November, February & June) to review the data collected regarding the mindful practices occurring in the school building, the effect it is having on students, and to set targets for further implementation. By February, 2019, we would expect to see our target of 100% of teachers who report consistent implementation of mindful practices as well as a wider range of variety of the types of activities teachers are engaging their students with. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will participate in 3 Google Surveys created collaboratively by administration and the school's Professional Development Committee during the school year (November, February & June). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The P.S. 116 community has a longstanding, deep-rooted belief that adult learning is critical to long-term student growth and progress. As such, the development of teacher teams and teachers as leaders have become key ingredients in the fabric of P.S. 116’s culture, and the administration has worked hard to nurture both. The school’s 2014-15 Quality Review Report stands as a testament and acknowledges this work. “The school staff has a collective commitment to ongoing professional collaboration, focusing together on meeting the needs of students, and elevating their practice and leadership, both individually and communally.” Need: While grade-level teacher team meetings are committed to meeting the needs of students, student data and information is not utilized to its full capacity or potential when making curricular or instructional decisions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade-level and teacher team meetings will follow a structured protocol that helps to ensure meetings are as focused and efficient as possible, and is grounded in the use of student information to make curricular and instructional decisions. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During September, school-wide professional development time will be devoted to the study and implantation of various protocols for meetings. Protocols for looking at student work, sharing professional texts, and planning for instruction will be analyzed and reflected upon. Throughout the school year, teachers will be expected to include the protocol that was used as part of the agenda they submit to administration for their team meetings. Teacher teams September 4, 2018–September 28, 2018 Principal, AP, math coach, teacher teams. Teacher teams September 2018-June 20189 Principal, AP, math coach, teacher teams. Administration and math coach will sit in on teacher team meetings to both ensure that protocols are in place, and to provide feedback on efficiency. Teacher teams September 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams, Administration, Parents/Guardians September 2018-June 20189 All professional development sessions provided by administration and professional development committee will follow strict protocols and serve as a model for teacher teams. Additionally, the families of our students will be invited to attend their child's class on the first and third Friday of every month to witness and participate in lessons that were designed and based on the work accomplished during teacher team meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, AP, math coach, Professional Development Committee Principal, AP, math coach, Professional Development Committee How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The families of our students will be invited to attend their child's class on the first and third Friday of every month to witness and participate in lessons that were designed and based on the work accomplished during teacher team meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 20  The school will utilize Google Forms to provide quick, easy access for teacher teams to submit agendas and protocols. The Tuesday "other professional work time" will be allotted for teacher team meetings. Additionally, weekly common preparation periods will be provided to all grade-levels so that teacher teams can meet further. Teachers will be provided with instructional resources containing various protocols to use as well as resources to help guide them through the use of protocols during teacher team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of January, 2019, all administrative and coach notes centered on teacher team meetings, as well as the submitted agendas from teacher team meetings, will be reviewed to assess the extent of impact protocols are having on the efficiency and quality of teacher team meetings. At that time, we would expect 100% of officially scheduled teacher team meetings to have a documented agenda and protocol. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Administrative notes on team meetings  Submitted Agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past five years the P.S. 116 staff has studied various elements of teaching practice that effect the level of student engagement in the classroom. Elements include: Student self-assessment/goal-setting   Mindfulness/social-emotional learning  Talk/collective conversations/the use of unanswerable questions  Growth mindset and agency  Choice in the classroom  Play/playfulness/joy/inquiry  Looking at student work/differentiation/planning All of these elements must work together and simultaneously if teachers are to maximize the level of student engagement in their classrooms. However, keeping all of these elements in balance has proved to be a challenge for teachers as evidenced by their own self-reflections. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50% of teachers will report and/or administrators will observe a greater sense of balance between the elements of engagement occurring in their classrooms as measured by teacher survey and MOTP teacher observations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development will be provided to teachers by The Inner Resilience Program on the benefits of mindful practices and ways to incorporate mindfulness into their daily classroom structures and routines. During the Monday Professional Development Time, teachers will have the opportunity to further study elements of engagement that are not as present in their classrooms as others. Independent study groups will be led by members of the school's Professional Development Committee. Consultants from the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project will work with all classroom teachers to lift the levels of self-assessment/goal-setting, talk, and differentiation in the classroom while increasing the level of language designed to promote a growth mindset, with a keen focus on the following subgroups: Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Bottom and top 10% of students. Regular and consistent feedback will be provided to all teachers during their MOTP observations regarding the level of balance present in their classrooms among the various elements of engagement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers and paraprofessionals All teachers and paraprofessionals September, 2018 through June 2019 Inner Resilience Program, Principal, Assistant Principal September, 2018 through June 2019 Principal, A.P., Professional Development Committee All teachers, paraprofessionals, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Bottom and top 10% of students All teachers September, 2018 through June 2019 Inner Resilience Program, Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal September, 2018 through June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The families of our students will be invited to attend their child's class on the first and third Friday of every month to witness and participate in lessons that incorporate all the aspects of instruction and classroom community that help to lift the level of engagement. During this time, teachers will "step out" of their lessons to discuss with and explicitly point out to families specific materials, pedagogical moves, and classroom routines, that are specifically designed to lift the level of engagement in the class and lesson. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  10 Monday professional development time sessions will be utilized to conduct whole-staff Professional Development sessions with the Inner Resilience Program  An additional allotment of Monday professional development sessions will be utilized to conduct professional study groups around the various elements of engagement  Common preparation periods will be embedded in the school schedule to allow grade-level teams to meet regularly and consistently as a team or with the school's math coach to examine student work for the purposes of for planning for differentiated instruction.  Per diem coverage will be employed so that teachers are freed up to work with Consultants from the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to study various elements of engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January, it is expected that teachers will report and/or administration will observe a greater sense of balance of the elements of engagement in at least 20% of the teaching staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will participate in a Google Survey created collaboratively by administration and the school's Professional Development Committee and MOTP observations will be used to measure the progress of this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: P.S. 116 received worldwide attention during the 2014-15 school-year for completely revising its approach to homework. In consultation with the School Leadership Team, this decision came as a direct result of a team of teachers spending over a year analyzing studies focused on the effects of traditional homework, as well as the benefits of out-of-school activities that better support a child’s development as a learner. As a result, our revised approach to homework eliminates traditional tasks that various research studies failed to provide any evidence linking them with current, or even future, academic success. Instead, our approach asks students to engage in activities outside of school that research has shown to have a positive impact on student academic performance and social/emotional development. Additionally, our revised homework approach further advances the goal of promoting high expectations and a heightened sense of engagement for all community members by including an element of choice and opportunities for families to work/spend time together on meaningful activities that develop academic skills, in addition to supporting social-emotional development. P.S. 116’s 2014-15 Quality Review Report made specific mention of P.S. 116’s revised approach to homework as a strength stating, “A highlight this school year has been the decision to eliminate traditional homework assignments and "re-brand" what students do in the hours after school as a means of preparing them for the kinds of decisions and activities they will be involved with as higher level learners and later, as adults.” The report asserts that the, school’s shift to PDF (Playtime/Downtime/Family Time) “clearly offered many choices for students that were independent and gave everyone access to experience meaningful play time or down time.” Need: While the school has placed a considerable effort on educating parents about the virtues of PDF and the elimination of traditional homework assignments, a greater emphasis on the importance of consistent, daily reading outside of school is needed. Further, based on research on reading growth and development, the reading should fit the following criteria: 1) The text(s) should be something the child enjoys and chooses to read. 2) The text(s) should be one that the child can read comfortably (word accuracy should be greater than 90%). 3) The text(s) should be one that the child can easily understand beyond plot (including: setting and its effect on the story, characters, themes, and messages). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 25  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 20% of P.S. 116 parents will report a greater awareness of their children's reading habits including: preferred topics, genres, reading level, and time spent reading at home, as measured by response to a school-created survey. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All classroom teachers will develop and utilize a reading accountability system that monitors whether or not daily reading is being completed. Additionally, teachers will regularly follow up with the families of those students who are not consistently reading at home, with a heightened sense of urgency for Students with Disabilities, our Black and Hispanic students, English Language Learners, and students deemed to be at-risk (Levels 1 & 2). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and their parents and guardians September 2018–June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, classroom teachers Workshops and information sessions will be held for families on the importance of consistent, nightly reading of "just right" books, and the effect it has on reading growth, cognitive and brain development, and academic performance. Parents and guardians November, 2018 & March, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, math coach, classroom teachers, specialty Teachers, related service providers Monthly newsletters from teachers and administration will highlight timely parenting articles around various ways to engage children at home that promote independent reading for enjoyment. Information will also include upcoming reading units of study (i.e., lessons to be taught, strategies to be learned, assessment criteria). Newsletters will be translated into necessary languages to ensure that communication with the families of English Language Learners occurs effectively and timely. The school will reformat "Families as Buddies" to a program that will invite families into classrooms to participate in the actual lessons students are being taught to get a sense of what students are learning, how they are learning, the progress their children are making, and how to encourage similar reading behaviors and discussion at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and guardians September, 2018 – June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, classroom teachers Parents and guardians September, 2018 – June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, classroom teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Monthly newsletters from teachers and administration will highlight timely parenting articles around various ways to engage children at home that further promote the goals and tenets of the school’s approach to homework. The newsletters will also contain specific information regarding the class' upcoming units of study (i.e., lessons to be 2018-19 CEP 27  taught, strategies to be learned, assessment criteria). Newsletters will be translated into necessary languages to ensure that communication with the families of English Language Learners occurs effectively and timely. Additionally, the school will use "Families as Buddies" to provide an opportunities for families to participate in the actual lessons students are being taught to get a sense of what students are learning, how they are learning, and the progress their children are making. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All classroom will be stocked with ample supply of high-interest, appropriately leveled books for students to take home for nightly reading Classrooms will be open to families the first and third Friday of every month. Classroom teachers will not be scheduled for preparation periods during these times. Newsletters will be written and distributed to parents every month. Email blasts from administration emphasizing and highlighting the importance of consistent, nightly reading at home. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School will survey parents in November (baseline), March, and June (summative) to measure parent engagement with student at-home reading. It is expected that, in March, at least 10% more parents will demonstrate a greater sense of their children's at-home reading habits than reported in November 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Survey created collaboratively by administration and the school's PDF Committee. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Services are determined based on school-wide structures, including: teacher recommendation, assessments (running records, in-book assessments), test scores, and previous retention. The intervention team meets weekly to make decisions based on data and teacher recommendation. After a period of approximately 6 weeks, the team reassesses the needs of identified students and readjusts, as necessary. Services are determined based on school-wide structures, including: teacher recommendation, assessments, test Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Shared reading, guided reading, readers’ theatre, and conferences are all used to practice decoding and develop comprehension strategies, such as: retelling, inferring, questioning, visualizing, fluency, etc. Assessments are administered throughout the school year. Interactive and shared writing are used to build skills, confidence, and stamina. Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery, and Great Leaps are programs implemented in first and second grades. Students practice skills learned in class with additional support, using supplemental models and tools to help better understand taught concepts. Math games and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Instruction is provided before school, during the day, and after school. Small group in the classroom. In addition, 1st & 2nd grade students receive 1-on-1 or small-group instruction (determined by the level of need) through an intensive reading intervention program, such as Reading Recovery. Small group Instruction is provided during the day and after school. 2018-19 CEP 29  Science Social Studies scores, and previous retention. The intervention team meets weekly to make decisions based on data and teacher recommendation. After a period of approximately 6 weeks, the team reassesses the needs of identified students and readjusts, as necessary. Services are determined based on school-wide structures, including: teacher recommendation, assessments, test scores, and previous retention. The intervention team meets weekly to make decisions based on data and teacher recommendation. After a period of approximately 6 weeks, the team reassesses the needs of identified students and readjusts, as necessary. Services are determined based on ELA data, particularly focused on non-fiction texts. The intervention team meets weekly to make decisions based on data and teacher recommendation. strategy groups that support skills are played and assessments are administered throughout the year. Concrete and pictorial models are used to develop and support new understandings. Social studies intervention is provided in conjunction with literacy support. Non-fiction texts are used to support upper grade students in research skills Small group Instruction is provided for small groups of students during the school day. Small group Instruction is provided for small groups of students during the school day. Social studies intervention is provided in conjunction with literacy support. Non-fiction texts are used to support upper grade students in transitioning from learning to read to reading to learn. 2018-19 CEP 30  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) After a period of approximately 6 weeks, the team reassesses the needs of identified students and readjusts, as necessary. Services are determined based on teacher recommendation to weekly Intervention Team meetings, as well as historical data. Repeated reading and early exposure to texts is one strategy used to increase comfort and confident with new material. Students work in small groups to develop social skills with peers, learn anger management techniques, develop conflict resolution skills, and learn strategies for dealing with anxiety, stress, and distressing life issues. 1:1 and small-group services provided by guidance counselor, psychologist, and social worker. These services are provided during the school day (both regularly scheduled, and on an as-needed basis). 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  Classroom supplies, at-risk counseling. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title I STH for Non-Title I Schools: $46,482 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mary Lindley Murray School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Mary Lindley Murray School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ●engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 38  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mary Lindley Murray School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 39  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 40  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 2 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: An after-school literacy program, as well as a Saturday Academy will be provided for ELLs and former ELLs in grades 4-5 who face high stakes NYS assessments in April and May. Students will meet in small grade-level cohorts. All of our upper grade ELLs and former ELLs will be invited and encouraged to participate. Additionally, subscriptions to Scholastic and Raz Kids, after-school/at home streaming digital learning environments, will be provided to all ELLs and former ELLs and their activities and assignments will be monitored and supervised by our licensed ESL teacher. Rationale: Our standardized assessment results, including NYSESLAT, indicate that upper grade students have been lagging in developing proficiency in reading and writing. Our most successful students, academically, have traditionally been those who enter our school in grades K-2. Students entering P.S. 116 after second grade, particularly those requiring additional supports such as our ELLs, and former ELLs are thus at a disadvantage. Our goal is to deepen their understanding and comprehension of reading material including fiction and non-fiction material and broaden their knowledge of academic vocabulary. Subgroups and Grade-Levels: ELLs and former ELLs grade 3-5 Schedule and Duration: Extended Day program, students will meet in small grade-level cohorts two times a week for 15 weeks (2:40pm - 4:30pm), beginning January 21, 2019 prior to the literacy and math assessments. Saturday Academy, students will meet in small grade-level cohorts for the 2 Saturdays prior to the NYS CCLS ELA exams (April 2-4, 2019), and 2 Saturdays prior to the NYS CCLS math exams (May 1-3, 2019) . All sessions will occur between 9:00am - 12:00pm. Language of Instruction: English # and Types of certified Teachers: 2 content area teachers who will work collaboratively with 2 licensed ESL teachers, Anne McGuire and Soyoung Ahn. Types of Materials: Scholastic digital and magazine materials (exclusive to the Title III program), Curriculum Associates Ready New York CCLS, past CCLS released exam questions. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Anne McGuire, the school's ESL teacher will give 3, one hour professional development training sessions during the Monday Professional Development Block, as outlined by the UFT Collective Bargaining Agreement, to other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs (39 teachers and 6 paraprofessionals). Tentative dates for these sessions are November 5, 2018, January 14, 2019 and March 8, 2019. The topics covered will be: creating an inviting classroom atmosphere that is conducive to ELLs; designing lessons and units to include various modalities of learning (visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile) to specifically engage ELLs; utilizing oral language activities to build fluency and confidence in ELLs; using graphic organizers and other differentiated instruction tools to guide ELLs in classroom learning; introducing academic language to ELLs, starting in kindergarten and advancing through fifth grade; strengthening content vocabulary skills for ELLs to assist them in their science, math, social studies, art, music, physical education classes. This component is at no cost to the Title III program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Activities We will have a series of four 45-minute meetings (September, November, January, April) designed to impact the ELL academic achievement of our students over time. Topics will include our Extended Day program and how parents can best support its implementation, how to best utilize on-line school-based subscriptions such as Scholastic On-Line, and strategies for parents to engage their children in active reading and wonderings while at home or traveling to everyday locations with their family. Sessions will be delivered by our ESL teacher, Anne McGuire accompanied by the content teachers, who will be teaching, and explain how these activities can offer their students the opportunity to strengthen their language skills. Light refreshments will be served. At the conclusion of this year's program, we will invite parents to a final celebration on the evening of April 19, 2018 to look back/look ahead at what is to come for their children as English Language Learners, hosted by the same staff, where students will showcase what they have learned. Strategies for summer language engagement will also be shared. Each student will have the opportunity to present the work they are most proud of to the audience. Students will have the opportunity to use a microphone and the use of digital media to make their presentations. 2018-19 CEP 46 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $11,000.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff No cost to Title III Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Saturday Academy: 4 Saturday Academy sessions 4 teacher x (3 hours instruction + 1 hour planning) x 4 sessions Extended Day (Reader's Theater) 15 weeks x 2 sessions per week x (2 hours instruction + 1 hour planning) x 2 instructors. 3 professional development sessions with highly qualified ESL instructor. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities For each event, agendas and sign-sheets will be distributed and kept on file in the Title III binder maintained by our ESL staff. Parent engagement activities will contain no per session costs. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL -Benchmark "Readers Theatre" to engage ELL students in close reading, connecting written to spoken language, character inference and comprehension. Scholastic subscriptions for all upper grade ELL/former ELL students w/ online streaming. Parent engagement supplies: Breakfast, pot-luck dinner Scholastic: 30 x $3.75 = $112.50 Razkids: 9.13 x $109.95 = $1,003.50 $250 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name P.S. 116 The Mary Lindley Murray School Borough Manhattan School Number 116 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jane Hsu Coach Naomi Berkowitz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anne McGuire Teacher/Subject Area Soyoung Ahn - 5th Grade Teacher/Subject Area Andrea LaRocca - Intervention Related-Service Provider Razel Lefkowitz - SETTS Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Gary Shevell Coach type here School Counselor Melody Pierre Parent type here Parent Coordinator Vicky Ritter Field Support Center Staff Member Sileni Nazario Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 545 Total number of ELLs 44 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.07% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 116 uses a variety of tools to assess the early skills of ELL's including Fountas and Pinnell and TCRWP assessment. These assessments indicate that the students show a weakness in vocabulary. We match students to reading level books based on these assessments. The data from these assessments generally are in line with NYSESLAT results in that our ELLs are stronger speakers and listeners than they are readers and writers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All classroom teachers have a minimum of two common preparation periods per week which are used to hold team meetings where assessment results and data are shared. Additionally, TCRWP AssessmentPro software is utilized to assist teachers and 2018-19 CEP 49  administration in the analysis of student reading growth. Finally, consultants from TCRWP assist grade-level teams in data analysis as well as planning as a result of that analysis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our free-standing ENL program is evaluated based on students' NYSESLAT scores in the four modalities - Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing, and informal speaking, listening, reading and writing assessments conducted by the ENL teacher and classroom teachers, as well as student portfolios, followed by communication between the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to discuss the progress of ELLs in their classroom. The ENL teacher compares the number of students maintaining proficiency levels based on NYSESLAT results with those students gaining proficiency levels, while noting the number of students achieving "Commanding" in all NYSESLAT modalities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the result are disaggregated, the school's Language Allocation Policy Team, as well as the school's Lead Instructional Team, review the results and plan for appropriate ELL interventions. Available programs, staffing considerations, budgeting, and scheduling are all taken into consideration when determining interventions for the school year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school utilizes RTI in order to minimize referral while meeting the needs of our students. For students within the RTI framework, our school has a specialized team of professionals who discuss and brainstorm all avenues to support ELL students who may be struggling academically as well as exhibiting emotional and/or behavioral issues. The data for each child is studied. This would include the child’s LABR (for those tested prior to 2014)/NYSITELL result and any exams such as NYSESLAT, ELA or the Math and Science exams, if the child was tested in these exams. The child’s attendance record is also examined as well as any health records that might be pertinent to the child's performance in school. Additionally, the team examines data in the form of classroom work in reading responses, representational drawing, writing projects and math work provided by the classroom teacher and exhibits of work given by specialty teachers who see the child, and also the ENL teacher. Our team then creates a individually tailored plan for each student where specific targeted goals are set. The goals are set by looking at relevant student data including TCRWP running records, On-Demand writing samples, nit math assessments, and teacher anecdotal notes. The plan may include Tier 1 interventions as well as Tier 2 interventions as necessary. The school also reaches out to parents in order to collaborate and agree on ways to support their child not only in school but at home. Specific goals are periodically monitored to ascertain the progress being made and whether or not to modify the goals and/or interventions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL Program: -NYSESLAT Results disaggregated by the four modalities (Speaking, Listening, Reading & Writing) -NYS CCLS Exams in ELA, Math & Science -TCRWP End of Year Assessments in Reading and Writing -Investigations End of Year Unit Assessments in Math -Scholastic's In-Book Reading Assessments for Grades 3-5 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL results are shared with all classroom teachers during the Monday Professional Development time as well as the School's Leadership team, Lead Instructional Team, as well as the school's Professional Development Committee, where discussion, further analysis, and appropriate adjustments are made. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We offer a freestanding ENL program with standalone instruction to build and develop language skills, and integrated ENL where the ENL teacher uses the integrated ENL model when possible for targeted instruction in all content areas. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to build upon classroom instruction and modify any instruction and assignments, thereby scaffolding classroom content-area work. For students who benefit from native language support, native language dictionaries and glossaries and books in the native language,if they exist, are available. This empowers students by making classroom work more manageable and comprehensible. The ENL teacher aligns instruction with the classroom teachers' curriculum and units of study. The ENL teacher teaches reading and writing through the balanced literacy approach with small group instruction to target language development, content-area knowledge and strategies, along with extensive use of visuals. She also provides native language dictionaries and glossaries for additional support. ELLs are grouped heterogeneously as well as homogeneously according to their proficiency levels, and they are provided with support based on their classroom curriculum. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering students receive 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction for a total of 360 minutes per week. Emerging students receive 90 minutes of Standalone ENL instruction, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction and 90 minutes of either Standalone ENL instruction or Integrated instruction per week. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of service per week. They receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction, and 90 minutes of either Standalone ENL or Integrated ENL instruction. Expanding students receive 1 unit (180 minutes) of study in ENL/ELA or other Core Content Area per week. Commanding students (former ELL's) receive 90 minutes per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area. The ENL teacher maintains a schedule to ensure that students are receiving the mandated number of hours. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher as well as classroom teachers use sheltered instruction which provides scaffolding strategies to engage students, and deliver content-area information to ensure ELL's are supported in the content areas. Students language proficiency, skills, and levels are taken into account to further ensure ELL's are supported in the content areas. By doing so, students connect new content with prior knowledge as often as possible, and use content-area books and magazines in various reading levels, as well as pictures, drama, and video specifically chosen to support ELL's in the content areas. Students work collaboratively in order to build and broaden comprehension. Further, books, dictionaries, and audio/video when possible, are offered to provide support for students in the native language. Curriculum in all subject areas has been carefully selected to ensure our ELL's meet the demands of the NYS Learning standards. These include, Investigations for mathematics, FOSS for Science, TCRWP Reading and Writing units for ELA and Social Studies. 2018-19 CEP 51  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? With over 15 languages spoken by our ELL population, we are continually looking for ways to provide opportunities for students to access materials in their native languages to better evaluate students. Software, translated web pages, selected books, and staff members who are fluent in the language are all utilized. For Spanish speaking students, we provide the Spanish LABR. The information gathered helps us to plan appropriate instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE-Although we currently do not have any SIFE students enrolled, our action plan would consist of an after school program for small group ELL instruction. It would also include invitation to participate in the school extended time sessions, participation in the school's 'Power Lunch' program and intervention by our reading specialist. Newcomers: Our focus for students between 0-3 years of ENL instruction is to provide them with salient vocabulary, attention to their receptive skills (listening & reading) as well as introducing basic structures for written and spoken language. Students will be primarily grouped based on proficiency levels. However, Entering and Emerging students may be grouped when similar needs arise. Similar hours of mandated instruction afford the opportunity to emphasize heterogeneous groups and differentiated instruction. Higher-level students will serve as models for Entering students while they acquire higher levels of academic language. Transitioning and Expanding level students will be grouped together, but instruction will be differentiated within this group as well as determined by need. Kinesthetic learning activities such as poetry, reader's theater, dance, song, dramatic performance including tableaus are utilized, particularly with Entering and Emerging ELL's. Additionally, high-interest activities such as field trips related to class studies, and creative cooperative group projects are used to build student engagement and enrich the language learning process. Developing: Our focus for students between 4-6 years is that they are made aware of their strengths and weaknesses as revealed on both the NYSELSAT and through teacher assessment and that they work with both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher to address their specific areas for growth. Trends indicate that this is predominantly reading comprehension and writing. They will also continue to receive the at-risk supports offered by the school such as extended day program and an after-school ENL program as well as special help in the content areas as necessary. Long-Term: We currently do not have any long-term ELL's, however, should a student transfer to P.S. 116, they will be provided with interventions such as small-group instruction with a focus on reading and writing. The ENL teacher would work collaboratively with the classroom teacher to provide push-in support. Former ELLs: Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL in ELA/core content-areas. They receive instruction involving videos and magazines, such as "Time for Kids Around the World," as well as "Science Spin" and "Scholastic News." These materials are utilized to continue delivering content material at the students' appropriate reading levels. Additionally, they will receive testing modifications as determined as necessary, with collaboration between the classroom teacher, the ENL teacher, the testing coordinator and the family. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety instructional strategies, including parallel teaching, one-teach one support, station work, one-on-one teaching, and scaffolded grade-level materials to provide students with access to academic content and to guide students in accelerating English language development. Teachers of ELL-SWDs follow students' IEPs in regard to academic and language goals for individual students and mandated services that these students are obligated to receive. In order to provide consistency for the students, outside service providers, such as SETSS, Speech and 2018-19 CEP 52  ENL, provide students with similar strategies, structures and materials as the classroom teachers. Classroom teachers and service providers discuss with one another the student's progress and continued needs. Classroom teachers also differentiate within their classroom, creating small groups to target specific student's academic and language needs. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers collaborate to build academic content by providing students with grade appropriate content at their reading level. As such, content-area materials at various levels of text are provided to ensure students have access to the content and can achieve maximum comprehension. Materials used for the various subgroups include, on-line reading programs such as "Raz Kids" and "Newsela" as well as laptops for individual writing projects/research and the development of language skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher, classroom teacher and service providers collaborate to strategically plan and create schedules that are carefully aligned to meet the diverse needs of the students, and to ensure students achieve their IEP goals while also attaining English proficiency. Pacing calendars, prep schedules and subject area blocks are carefully coordinated and readjusted when needed to maximize impact for each student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our ELLs, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, as well as our recently Commanding (2 years) students, will be presented with differentiated intervention services during the school day as necessary. For ELA, guided reading, targeted small-group instruction led by our reading specialists, Raz Kids, Recipe for Reading, and Read Ahead, will all be utilized. For mathematics, small-group instruction, Dreambox, and Contexts for Learning will be used to provide targeted intervention. For Science and Social Studies, small-group instruction as well as Scholastic's Science Spin, and Scratch will be utilized. On-line interventions listed above will be provided in the child's native language as often as possible. Students who are in full-time special education classrooms as well as those who receive SETTS support will continue to be addressed using ENL methodologies aligned with the goals stated in their IEP's. These goals are supported with programs such as Wilson, Fundations, Recipe for Reading, Mathematics in the City and Razkids. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school this year has partnered with Studio in a School to include visual arts as a means for our ENL's to express themselves. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No previously set in place programs aimed at servicing ELLs will be discontinued for the current school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 116's ELLs are provided support services including: counseling, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and physical therapy as the need arises. These services are provided in English. In addition, P.S. 116 provides the following additional support services for ELLs: Extended Day Literacy — a 1-hour extra literacy block for students that have been identified as requiring extra support Extended Day Math — a 1-hour extra math block for students that have been identified as requiring extra support Saturday Test Prep Academy — A Saturday program designed to provide test taking strategies for New York State Standardized exams. Impact Coaching Network (ICN) - Curriculum chess offered in the classroom 116 Kids - A myraid of after school activities/clubs including Music, Dance, cooking, yoga, arts & crafts, photography, sculpture, robotics, knitting, dance, sports, Mandarin, French, science, puppetry… Tennis Innovators - An afterschool tennis program available to all students at P.S. 116 All of these services/programs are provided in English and all of our ELLs are invited and encouraged to participate in these programs. 2018-19 CEP 53  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms are equipped with document cameras and a minimum of 5 laptops which are accessible to the students. Additionally, the ENL classroom is equipped with laptops specifically for use by ELLs. ELLs have access to leveled libraries based on Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and participate in a bi-monthly reading buddy program. Books and dictionaries in different languages are provided when needed and realia, functional documents, photographs, visuals, project work, and hands-on manipulatives are all utilized for enrichment of lessons. Classroom teachers have listening centers designated for ELLs, with read-along tapes to provide additional support in reading fluency. Computer software programs and small-group guided reading target the specific comprehension areas where our ELLs need support. Content-area instructional materials are provided to ELLs according to their grade levels, but matching their reading levels. Subscriptions to periodicals for children such as "Time for Kids" and Scholastic's science-based magazine "Let's Find Out" and "Scholastic News" are also used with ELL's to support and deepen content-area vocabulary, knowledge and skills. Materials can be presented through multiple mediums such as technology, magazines, books on tape, and newspaper. Mathematics manipulatives, charts, tables and other tools are made available to students as they learn mathematics. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher and the classroom teachers provide extensive visual materials to support their ELLs, and resources in the native language are available to support students' needs. Resources are available for the students to borrow. Families and ELL students are encouraged to speak in their native languages at home, and the cultures from which our ELL students come from are celebrated in school. We incorporate/enrich lessons with materials that tap into students' home languages and cultures, thus bridging the gap between school and home and possible language barriers in order to motivate students. Staff members who speak the same language as a newcomer participate in orientation sessions to acclimate the student to the school environment. Finally, the school's homework policy encourages parents to engage in scholastic endeavors at home where the home language use is encouraged. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All teachers at P.S. 116 teach content material that is specific to the grade of the student and align the content of the grade level with each ENL student's current language proficiency. Further, the school maintains a leveled-resource library for all teachers to access grade and age appropriate materials. The resource library is continually updated and stocked to further ensure teachers have age and grade appropriate materials. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to ensure that the instruction provided corresponds to the appropriate ages and grade-levels of the students. Additionally, the ENL teacher has access to all curriculum materials to review as necessary and use as a resource. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 116 provides newly enrolled ELLs and their families the opportunity to meet school administration and to tour the school with our parent coordinator Vicky Ritter and meet the ENL teacher, Anne McGuire. During the tour, Ms. Ritter introduces them to the activities they can have access to our school, including after school/enrichment programs. Additionally, current ENL family members of the school's high incidence languages serve as "ambassadors" to greet and new families to offer a parent's perspective on the school's ENL program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives at this time. However, 116 Kids, one of our after school community partners, offers a range of language learning opportunities including Chinese, French , and Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 54  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teacher, Anne McGuire will attend professional development sessions offered by Teachers College Reading and Writing Program calendar days that specifically address the needs of ELL's. In addition, Ms. McGuire will participate in school based professional study groups and will join select collaborative inquiry teams that look to address the specific needs of English Language Learners. Additionally, the ENL teacher receives, on a regular basis, an email newsletter from the Office of English Language Learners listing professional development opportunities in the region and shares this with all ELL personnel at the school. The school provides staff and teachers of ELL's with workshops and study groups focusing on ENL strategies and methodologies to ensure that they receive at least the minimum standard of professional development hours linked to the Common Core Learning Standards as prescribed by the CR Part 154. This includes on-site professional development provided by our ENL teacher, Teachers College Reading and Writing program, ICT consultant Kristin Goldmonsour and Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning. This work is ongoing throughout the school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Once every six weeks of the school year the ENL teacher provides professional development training to the school staff. Additionally, teacher teams meet in study groups to investigate strategies and methodologies to address the needs of ELL students. Topics include second language acquisition, developing listening skills, vocabulary development, cultural differences in teaching and learning, and scaffolding techniques in content areas. Sign-in sheets, and agendas are maintained in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with families to discuss their child's progress as English Language Learners will be held by the ENL teacher during the Tuesday Parent Engagement Time allotted to teachers by the Collective Bargaining Agreement between City of New York and the United Federation of Teachers. These meetings will include one-on one discussion of goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Notices for these meetings are backpacked home. For those families requiring translation services, the school utilizes staff members who speak a wide range of languages to meet the needs of families. If a parent speaks a language other than a language the school can provide translation for, a friend or family member who may speak dual languages is utilized to help in the translation, and/or the Translation Service Unit is contacted to arrange for a translator to provide translation 2018-19 CEP 55  services. Over the phone conferences are held for families who cannot attend in person. The ENL teacher maintains a log which documents all individual parent meetings with the families of all ELL students. Additionally, all email correspondence and letters sent home are saved. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are many ways in which P.S. 116 involves the parent community, including the families of ELL's. In September, all families are invited to attend their child’s classroom Curriculum Night. Flyers are sent out in English and languages other than English. During this evening, families are provided with guidance on how to support their child’s schoolwork. It also provides an opportunity to explain our approach to teaching literacy and mathematics. Translators and handouts are available in languages other than English; our staff members provide oral and written translations. In addition, all school flyers are available on our school's webpage which can be translated into over 50 languages. For languages that we cannot provide in-house, we contact the translation unit. By having regular conversations with our staff about specific goals for each grade, teachers are better able to explain to families the expectations we hold for their children. This is the fifteenth year the school has held Families as Buddies. On the first and third Friday of the month during first period. During this time, parents are encouraged to join their child’s class for a period of reading and math. Depending on the grade, teacher, and the parents’ own comfort levels, they can participate in a variety of ways. They may read to a small group of children or students may read to them. Parents may play a math game with children, or may collaborate with them to solve a problem. No matter how they participate, all parents, including the parents of ELLs, leave with a better understanding of how to help their children at home. Finally, all parents, including ENL's are invited to share artifacts, stories, and videos pertaining to the culture and backgrounds of our diverse body of students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jane Hsu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 116 Mary Lindley Murray School DBN: 02M116 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jane Hsu Gary Shevell Vicky Ritter Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Anne McGuire ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Soyoung Ahn / 5 th Grade Teacher/Subject Area Andrea LaRocca / Intervention Naomi Berkowitz Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Melody Pierre School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Sileni Nazario Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M116 School Name: MaryLindleyMurray Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Vicky Ritter Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school makes note of all Home Language Surveys which indicate on Part 3 that the parent wishes to receive written and oral communication in a language other than in English. Preferred home language is also noted on the school's blue emergency contact cards in the event the card needs to be utilized. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 531 90.92 532 91.1 2018-19 CEP 60  Spanish Chinese (any) Japanese 20 9 8 3.42 1.54 1.37 19 7 9 3.25 1.2 1.54 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Class newsletters, notices and Parent/Teacher Meetings and Sign-up forms, and permission slips. September, November,January, May, and rolling throughout the school year as notices are distributed. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Online Document translation Services, Google Translate ESL Letters (Including Home Language Surveys, Entitlement letters, Primarily during September of the school calendar year. Continuous based on rolling admission. On-line Document Translation Services, NYCDOE Intranet Resources, Google Translate. Non-Entitlement Letters Continuing Entitlement Letters, Placement Letters, Parent Orientation Notifications, Parent Survey and Program Agreement, Default Letter, & ELL Brochures over 80 languages: General school information, Registration information, After-school information, School calendar, Testing information, PTA information, Parent resources, Student resources, Middle School Information, Family Handbook Administrative Forms Always available School website documents are available in 80 languages Throughout the school year, as forms are distributed. On-line Document Translation Services, NYCDOE Intranet Resources, Google Translate. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night & Parent/Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May All ENL Meetings including: ENL orientation meetings ENL breakfast, ENL One-On-One Meetings September, October, March, and rolling based on admissions and individual meetings scheduled throughout the school year IEP Meetings Annual/Triennial/Initial reviews Ongoing as per special education regulations Informal meetings, such as those held by administration, teachers, counselors, attendance monitors, secretaries, parent-coordinator,and after-school programs, As needed based on the situation and are ongoing throughout the year. provide interpretation service(s)? All handouts are translated via Online Document Translation. Oral interpretation is provided by staff members as well as the DOE's over the phone translation service. All handouts are translated via Online Document Translation as well as pre-existing translated documents on the DOE website. Oral interpretation is provided by staff members as well as the DOE's over the phone translation service. Oral interpretation is provided by staff members as well as the DOE's over the phone translation service. Parent may provide their own translator if they choose to do so. All handouts are translated via Online Document Translation as well as pre-existing translated documents on the DOE website. Oral interpretation is provided by staff members as well as the DOE's over the phone translation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. For school-wide emergencies, parents are encouraged to call 311 for information which is available in multiple languages by following the correct prompts. For individual emergencies, oral interpretation and communication is provided by staff members as well as the DOE's over the phone translation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 62  The school's Language Access Coordinator will disseminate all pertinent information, conduct all trainings and share all resources available to staff to ensure the goals of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 are met. Monday Professional Development time, email correspondence, and one-on-one conversations will be used as necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per Chancellor's Regulation A-663 all required notifications and displays have been provided and/or are in place. The Welcome Poster and Language ID Guide are posted at the beginning of the year at the security desk and main entrance. Additionally, the Parents Bill of Rights is shared with families at registration and is available in all of the DOE provided Languages. Finally, the Parent's Guide to Language access is available for all parents to take in the main office. The Parent's Guide to Language Access is also distributed at ENL parent meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Informal feedback is provided to the Parent Coordinator as well as the ENL teacher, as typically many families who require translation services are the parents of ELL's. Additionally, our school's website (www.ps116.org), which is able to be translated into more than 80 languages, has the ability to accept feedback/suggestions regarding the quality and availability of translation services as well as any other concerns they may have. 2018-19 CEP 63 
