2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M124 School Name: P.S. 124 YUNG WING Principal: ALICE HOM 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Yung Wing Elementary PS 124 02M124 310200010124 PK - 5 40 Division Street NY, NY 10002 212-966-7237 School Number (DBN): 212-219-3069 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Alice Hom Ahom2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alice Hom Nancy Aglialoro Benny Wong Vicky Chiu Vicky Chiu N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue Room 713 NY, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Manhattan D. 2 Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet M. Chu FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave. NY, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alice Hom Nancy Aglialoro Lillian Shyu N/A Vicky Chiu N/A N/A N/A Melissa Wong SaeromePark Lillian Moy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Guidance 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Caitlin Kenny Cristina Alicea Linda Shih Sherry Ng Amy Crisotomo Joyce Yee VickyChiu NikiTam Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. 124 is to create an inclusive community that strives to foster caring, compassionate, and critical thinkers. Students are provided with a stimulating and well rounded education through a range of programs, suited to their unique needs and abilities. The variety of rigorous educational programs address the intellectual, physical, social and emotional needs of all our students. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Yung Wing Elementary School, located in the heart of New York City’s Chinatown, is dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all of our students. P.S. 124 supports a constructivist approach to learning and implements a literature-based balanced reading program, a hands-on problem solving approach to learning mathematics, and an inquiry-based model for studying science and social studies. Real world problems are used to challenge students to be critical, analytical and independent thinkers as well as to make their learning real, meaningful and purposeful. Cooperative grouping, peer tutoring and individual/group projects are some of the environments in which students learn. Students, faculty and administrators trust in the value of hard work and maintain high expectations because they see themselves as lifelong learners. Teachers continually work at improving and enhancing pedagogical practices and they are deeply involved in their own learning. They teach programs that are an outgrowth of their staff development and their own collaborative process across grades as well as intra-grade. In our fifth year of the Response To Intervention (RTI) Initiative, our school will continue to use DIBELS as our school-wide progress monitoring tool to identify our lowest students in order to then provide targeted small group instruction and interventions for reading. Additionally, a team of teachers with an administrator who were engaged previously in the Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) will continue to use protocols learned in order to facilitate grade and school-wide meetings. Parents are an important part of our school community. They are actively engaged in many facets of the teaching and learning process at P.S. 124. We value their support as volunteers in our school library as well as fund-raising efforts to benefit all children in our school. Community partnerships are essential to support and sustain school initiatives. P.S. 124 has fostered relationships with various community based organizations, arts programs, cultural institutions, businesses and higher education institutions that have provided the students with many wonderful enriching experiences. Such collaborations include National Dance Institute, New York Historical Society, National Asian Artists Project, NYC Kids' Project, and Asian Professional Extension (APEX). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a school with a large Asian population (94%), we are committed to providing a rigorous education program that meets the individual needs of all students including English Language Learners (32%), Talented and Gifted (Gr. K-5, 1 class/grade), and Special Education students (17% - Gr. K-5, 1 ICT class/grade) . Needs include necessary service providers based on mandates and data from assessments given during benchmark periods. Students identified as at-risk will be discussed by the SIT team to create an action plan for small group instruction to address learning needs which include phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary building or interpreting and reasoning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Most Progress - Strong Family & Community ties, Supportive Environment Areas of Focus for this school year - Rigorous Instruction, Effective School Leadership 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M124 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 724 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 1 20 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 54.0% % Attendance Rate 52.2% % Reduced Lunch 30.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 2.1% 1.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 80.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 43 24 98.1% 1.8% 12.7% 0.0% 94.3% 1.9% 4 8% 5.1 90.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-17 Quality Review, the following trends were noticed: QR 1.1 The curricula emphasize higher-order thinking skills and academic rigor across all grades. There is also evidence that teachers use student word and data to plan and refine instructional tools. The curricula include tasks that stress cognitive engagement for students with disabilities and English Language Learners (ELLs). (P) QR 1.2 Across classrooms, instructional practices reflect a shared belief that students learn best through student engagement and small group activities and they are aligned with the CCLS and instructional shifts. Student discussion and participation is evident. In classroom visited, students displayed high levels of thinking and participation, and they produced meaningful work products. (P) QR 2.2 Across classrooms, teachers use assessments and rubrics that are aligned to the school's curricula. Teachers are utilizing checks for understanding and student self-assessment; however these were seen inconsistently across classrooms. Staff members provide actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student progress so that effective adjustments are being made to teacher practice in order to meet the needs of all students, although there is inconsistent evidence of providing students with next steps. (P) Analysis of the sections on the 2017-18 NYSESLAT assessments indicate many ENLs struggle with the Speaking component in grades K through 1 and the writing component in grades 2 through 5. Opportunities to increase English language production occur mainly during school hours. Diverse instructional activities and learning experiences need to be planned to build oral language skills. Students need vocabulary development to improve their reading comprehension skills, writing process and oral presentation skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of ENLs at the Expanding level in grades 1-5 will become Commanding in proficiency as measured by the 2019 NYSESLAT given in May 2019. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Literacy coach will provide cycles of professional development with select grades. Each grade will determine a Teachers College Reading or Writing or SS Passport unit of study to focus learning strategies that will support their students’ oral language development and/or vocabulary development to improve reading comprehension and writing skills. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENLs in grades 1-3 Oct. 2018 - Apr. 2019 Administrators ENL teachers Classroom teachers Professional development on ENL Policy and CR Part 154 for teachers to understand shifts in supporting ELLs to help them meeting learning expectations aligned with CCLS/Next Generation Standards. Classroom teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators K - Gr. 5 ENL teachers as facilitators ENL teachers will expand their participation in grade level teacher teams to provide colleagues with support on best practices in ENL instruction. The support includes providing professional texts, strategies for explicit language instruction (i.e. deconstructing complex sentences), and systematic instruction of academic talk in the classroom. Increase the frequency of ENL push-in/co-teaching model across the school. This will effectively support both student academic instruction as well as enhance teacher pedagogy. Classroom teachers Gr. K-5 Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Workshops on NYSESLAT components, NYS ELA, Math and Science assessments. Classroom publishing parties, project-based presentations and hands-on literacy, math or science interactive activities that help parents experience the learning & thinking that their children are engaged in. Parents Oct. 2018 - June 2019 ENL teachers Administrators Administrators Parent Coordinator Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 13  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. October 2018 - Open meeting for parents on CCLS/Next Generation ELA/Math Standards and explaining ways instruction in classrooms is aligned and rigorous as well as differentiated to meeting the diverse levels of students. - Administrators November 2018 - Workshop for parents in grades K-2 demonstrating Fundations and explaining skills learned by students - Classroom teachers & Literacy coach January 2019 - Parent meeting on grading policy and evidence teachers use to assess and determine progress of students - Teachers & administrators March 2019 - Family Math Night to have parents learn purpose of math games in developing mental math and numeration skills - Teachers and administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● One common grade preparation period will be scheduled for each grade level team to collaborate and plan together. ● Monday Professional Development 80 minute block will be used periodically by grade teams for analysis of student data, creating assessments and/or rubrics aligning units of studies to CCLS/Next Generation Standards, collaborating with ESL, Special Education or cluster teachers to enhance interdisciplinary instruction and participating in short cycles of PD activities on topics of interest and need (i.e., Effective ENL strategies, Positive Behavior Instructional Strategies). ● Fiction and non-fiction texts, training materials, professional books and supplies will be provided by administrators using school budget. Per diem and per session funds will be used for team planning activities and attendance at workshops/trainings that will help teachers impact student achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of Expanding level ELL students in grades 1-5 will have moved at least two reading levels as measured by TC Running records or Fountas & Pinell Literacy Assessments or DRA and will have demonstrated growth as evidenced in DIBELS mid-year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measure used to assess progress will be: 2018-19 CEP 14   DIBELs, Grades K-5  TC Running records, Fountas & Pinell Literacy Assessments, or DRA, Grades K-5 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? While we have a full-time guidance counselor with interns who work with small groups of students to build social skills and/or deal with conflict-resolution and problem-solving skills, teachers have expressed concerns regarding disrespectful behaviors and attitudes by upper grade students with staff and other adults. We began implementing Growth Mindset habits in 2015-16 and A Mindset for Learning in 2017-18 in order to create student perseverance and develop personal work habits to improve their focus and social skills with peers. Teachers would like to create a school environment where respect and leadership among students is developed and strengthened. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all staff members receiving professional development in RULER (the evidenced-based approach to social and emotional learning developed at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence), 80% of staff will know and use all Anchor tools. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Personal and Professional Learning for all staff in RULER - On-line course - Creation of school-wide Charter - Use of Mood Meter during staff meetings RULER Approach  The Anchor Tools of Emotional Intelligence: Anchor Tool #1 (The Charter), Anchor Tool #2 (The Mood Meter), Anchor Tool #3 (Meta-Moment), Anchor Tool #4 (The Blueprint)  RULER on-line community- rulercommunity.yale.edu  RULER coach from Yale  Monthly newsletters from Yale   Integration into school-wide practices and policies Inspiring an "Emotions Matter" Mindset Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Nov. 2018-June 2019 Nov. 2018- June 2019 School Leaders, Educators, Non-Teaching Staff School Leaders, Educators, Non-Teaching Staff RULER Implementation Team (Administration, Chapter Leader, Staff members, and School Guidance Counselor) RULER implementation team (Administrators, School Guidance Counselor, Teachers on the RULER Team) THRIVE NYC Initiative - Mental Health Consultant Program All Staff Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Administration  Resource specialist from Office of School Health to Admin Guidance Counselor continue assistance in linking up school and families with outpatient resources and community health facilities Staff training/workshops & additional support services on needs basis  School Mental Health Consultants 2018-19 CEP 17 Parent Workshops offered on: Parents Nov. 2018 -June 2019 Parents Internet Etiquette/Social Media  Positive Social Behaviors & Communication   Building Inner Resilience  Apps to Support English Language Learners/SWDs  Questioning Techniques to Use at Home Guidance Counselor, Administration, Previously trained staff members Invited guest speakers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline: November, 2018/January, 2019/March, 2019/June, 2019 Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and Administrators will invite guest speakers to talk about effective structures to promote positive relationships in the home and offer strategies/resources for parents to recognize emotional triggers and ways to directly address behaviors and emotional feelings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RULER resources will be downloaded and distributed to all classroom & cluster teachers. Monthly assemblies will be scheduled for each grade with foci on various topics including: bullying, building resilience, positive social communication skills. Guest speakers from community organizations (i.e., local precinct, wellness instructor, Charles B. Wang Community Health Program, NYU ParentCorps)) will be invited to talk on specific concerns identified by school community. Guidance counselor and interns will work with small groups during lunch periods. CARING, an after-school drama intervention program, will continue with up to 10 students, supervised by school guidance counselor. Per session and PTA/FOYW funds will be used for school personnel to study RULER resources, view webinars, and engage in activities to familiarize themselves with the purpose of the components in preparation to implement with their students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of staff will have participated in staff meetings in Mood-meter and creation of Charter activities as measured by attendance at meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 18  Instrument of measure will be feedback from staff, consistent use of Mood-meter, and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the past three years, teams of teachers collaborated in a variety of teacher teams such as Grade level, Vertical Team, RTI Leadership Team, Teacher Leadership Program, and the PD Committee. Teachers took on leadership roles to structure professional dialogue among colleagues: * to spearhead adoption of school-wide universal screener * to plan/outline a professional learning calendar for the staff * to align assessment and curricula within grades and across the school * to foster a greater professional learning environment on grade level teacher teams focusing on data-driven instruction Based on the End of Year DIBELS data in 2017-18, our students in all grades made gains to close the gap. Our school uses the Monday 80 minutes PD times to promote collaboration among staff to analyze student data, plan curricula and to attend training facilitated by colleagues (i.e., DASA, Mindset for Learning stances, NYSESLAT). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 60% of teachers will be involved in leadership roles by planning and facilitating teacher team meetings, parent workshops, professional development activities, and/or lab-sites to improve teaching and learning practices aligned with CCLS/Next Generation Standards, 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leadership Program team members will work to improve the professional learning culture among staff by using protocols to strengthen teaming practices and facilitate team decision making. Response to Intervention Leadership team will support administrators in coordinating infrastructure, school-wide and grade-wide staff meetings, and staff training. The RULER Implementation Team will meet throughout the year and plan RULER Professional Development for the entire staff. Grade level teacher teams Oct. 2018-June 2019 3 Teacher Leaders Administrators School- wide staff All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Nov. 2018 -June 2019 3 - 4 Teachers Administrators RULER Implementation Team (Administrators, School Guidance Counselor, Teachers on the RULER Team) Participating ENL and GE teachers will hold a book study group to learn strategies, implement in classrooms and reflect on effective teaching strategies to strengthen academic language. ENL teachers Dec. 2018 - March 2019 3 ESL teachers, 3-5 GE teachers The School Implementation Team Action Plan will focus efforts on Improving Quality IEP writing and considerations for Least Restrictive Environment by completing IEP reviews and implementing IEP meeting protocols. GE teachers SE teachers, RS Providers Oct. 2018 -June 2019 1 GE teacher, 1 SE teacher, 1 Guidance Counselor, 1 related service provider, Administrator ENL teachers will attend professional development workshops and facilitate training on effective ESL strategies to strengthen reading and writing skills ENL teachers Oct. 2018 - May 2019 4 ENL teachers, 4-6 GE teachers GE teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 21  Monthly workshops from Oct. 2018 - May 2019 Parent workshops offered by literacy coach, classroom teachers and administrators on Fundations, Read Aloud, Writing Strategies, Technology supports and limitations for children. Guidance counselor will invite speakers from local health and family support agencies to talk on topics such as Positive Communication with Children, Strategies to De-stress, Dealing with Crisis, and Setting Limitations in the Home. Exit slips with feedback from parents will be collected after each workshop. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers attending ESL or RTI meetings will have per diem substitutes or co-teachers cover their classes  Per Diem substitutes will cover classroom teachers as they attend professional development or meet with ESL consultant (Title III). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, at least 25 staff members will facilitate Mon. PD meetings, teacher teams, RTI Leadership team meetings will be facilitated by teacher leaders and logs/agendas will be uploaded onto Google Drive. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Logs/Agendas/Sign in sheets with 60% staff participation will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-17 Quality Review and 2017-18 School Learning Survey: QR 4.1 School leaders support new teachers with informal and formal observations throughout the school year. They capture areas of strength and growth for teachers with written feedback. School leaders promote growth and allow for reflection of teachers pertaining to their instructional practices with clear and concise feedback and expectations. (P) To build trust and lead by example, administrators will engage in professional development alongside teachers. Input from different committees (PD Committee, RTI Leadership Team) will be used to plan year-long professional development. School leaders (principal and assistant principals) need to engage in classroom observations and provide actionable feedback to teachers in order for clear expectations of teacher practice to be articulated. Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching is research-based and provides a common language for teachers and administrators to use for professional discussions. In addition, administrators will support teachers by providing coverages for inter-visitations or grade planning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders conducting classroom observations, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching to support teachers in their instruction and professional growth, 30% of teachers who received overall MOTP Effective ratings in 2017-18 will move up to Highly Effective, as measured by the 2018-19 Advance overall MOTP ratings. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and assistant principals will conduct Individual Planning Conferences with all classroom, cluster, ENL and SE teachers to discuss goals. School leaders will conduct observations and provide feedback to all teachers using competencies and rubrics from the Danielson Framework for Teaching. All teaching staff Sept. - Oct. 2018 Principal Assistant principals Teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant principals Webinars and videos to support competencies will be recommended to teachers for professional development. Teachers Oct. 2018 - May 2019 Principal Coaching opportunities will be offered to teachers to further enhance professional growth. Teachers Oct. 2018 - May 2019 Assistant principals Administrators RULER Implementation Team will facilitate professional development activities to create school charter, demonstrate and implement use of Mood Meter, and share additional resources on strategies to promote positive social-emotional among staff members Administrators Nov. 2018- June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement RULER Implementation Team (Administrators, teachers) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018 - Dissemination of goals during Parent Orientation meetings and first PTA meeting - Administrators Monthly SLT meetings - Sept. 2018 - June 2019 - SLT teacher members, parent members, principal School-wide use of Class Dojo, specifically School Story, to show and share information relating to classroom instruction as well as communicate general school events in a timely manner. Translation is enabled through this social platform. - Administrators and all school staff In September 2018 we will be launching a brand new school web-site that will highlight our schools goals and mission to develop curious, compassionate, critical thinkers. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching (2nd Edition) TCRWP Video library EngageNY Professional Development video library RULER On-line course, Coach from Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders conducting classroom observations, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching to support teachers' professional growth, 30% of teachers who received overall MOTP Effective ratings in 2017-18 will receive at least two ratings of Highly Effective in 4 out of 8 Framework for Teaching components, as measured by Advance observations between October 2018 and February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric will be the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-17 Quality Review Report: QR 3.4 School leaders articulate high expectations to the entire staff. Teachers and staff are part of a culture of learning that enforces high expectations to all students. Counselors support students as they prepare for the next level. (P) The need continues for translated monthly school newsletters and periodic communication from school staff to keep parents informed about what is happening with their children as well as in the wider school community. Areas of strength include the following: ● Workshops conducted throughout the school year to educate parents/guardians of ENLs on ways to help and further support them at home; ● Extended day (by PS 124 teachers) and Saturday APEX tutoring sessions are offered to help students prepare for NYS ELA and Math tests; ● A body of parents who are very involved and engaged in student activities to support the goals of the school; ● Translation of major announcements and most documents in Chinese to increase parental and community involvement; ● Recruitment of translators for school events such as parent-teacher conferences, workshops, literacy fair, etc.; ● Celebrations such as Lunar New Year, class publishing parties and arts events that allow parents to observe, actively participate in and appreciate the talents and skills of their children; ● Parent engagement events such as Parent + Child Arts and Math Games that allow parents to learn more about students' education and provide parents with more opportunity to communicate with teachers; ● Providing mental health services and social work services to the students at risk. Priority Needs include the following: ● Developing a resource center where parents can meet, obtain information, and train for volunteer opportunities in the school. 2018-19 CEP 26  ● Defining parent engagement time for the parents and encouraging frequent communication with the parents as to their children's progress during the year; ● Early identification and intervention for mental health resources to support students who are at risk; ● Encouraging more parents and caretakers to volunteer in school and in the classrooms, and to attend workshops to learn ways to work on academics with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of the our student population will have a family member participate in a school event function with them at least once as evidenced by sign-in sheets collected by classroom teachers and parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/guardians will be better informed about the purpose and use of parent engagement time through: Parents, Sept. 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator guardians Administrators ● Sept. Parent Orientation ● Monthly PTA meetings ● Active involvement in workshops Workshops and training will be provided to the parents and caretakers to educate them on supporting their children academically, socially and mentally, and to inform them as to available community resources. Parent Resource Center will be provided to parents and caretakers to research, collaborate and discuss ways to support their children. The Center will assist and encourage parents and caretakers to actively volunteer in the school community. Teachers Parents, guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administrators Teachers Consultant assigned from Office of School Health Parents, guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019 PTA Invite parents/guardians: Parents, guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019  to participate in classroom events and activities (i.e. AM Reading Buddies, Mystery Guest, Career speaker) in order for them to observe ways to support their child(ren) and actively engage with them in the learning process.  Hands-on participation to use Imagine Learning App to improve language skills for ENLs.  Workshops on movement/yoga that would support students with de-stressing and mindfulness. Parent Coordinator Administrators Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Related service providers 2018-19 CEP 28 Offer referrals for mental health services to those families with students who are assessed to be at risk. Parents, guardians, and students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Consultant assigned from Office of School Health 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community based organizations and other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement include: - Charles B. Wang Community Health Center - Chinese - American Planning Council - Gouveneer's Hospital - APEX - University Settlement - Henry Street Settlement - NYC Kids' Project Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● PTA meetings to disseminate information and recruit/invite parents to engage in class events/activities. ● Parent coordinator, bilingual (Chinese) staff members as translators during workshops and meetings with parents. ● School website www.ps124m.org and Class Dojo School Story App to inform and provide resources to parents/guardians. ● Per diem and per session funds for staff to assist as translators during workshops/meetings. ● Community organizations/resources will be accessed and offered to parents so that they can engage more in supporting their child(ren)’s academic, social and emotional needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 29  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent comments and feedback from workshops, attending class and/or school wide events - February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from SLT School Parent Survey, School Learning Survey, and Parent comments and feedback on school events will provide us with goals/ideas for future events that would involve/increase family engagement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DIBELS, Level 1 on NYS ELA Exam Mathematics Science Level 1 on NYS Math Exam Assessments by Science teachers Social Studies Assessments by classroom teachers Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations, WILSON, LLI, Great Leaps, WTW, Orton Gillingham, Repeated readings, interactive writing, timed readings, interactive spelling, peer tutoring Math games, Do the Math modules (targeting specific math strands) Lunchtime clubs Extendedschool day tutoring sessions Guided reading groups At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher request with supporting evidence of minimal student progress or incidences of behavior or social problems 1.Lively Letters Phonological awareness, analyze sentences & formulate different types of sentences, articulation - provided by speech personnel. 2. Art therapy - provided by art Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, push-in, peer support During school day (ranges from 1x - 5x/week, 20 or 45 minute sessions) After-school Weekend academy Small group, individual tutoring During school day (ranges 2-3x/week, 30 minute sessions) Small group Small group Peersupport 1. Small group 2. Small group 3. Small group 4. Small group During school day at lunchtimes In class during school day 1. During school day, 30 minutes sessions 2. During school day, 30 minutes sessions 3. During school day, 30 minute sessions 4. After school - 45 minutes /day/week 2018-19 CEP 31  Guidancecounselor interactions with identified students Parentrequests (based on extenuating circumstances) therapist from NYU and interns 3 Lunch bunch & play therapy provided by guidance counselor. 4. Dramaafter-school programprovided by consultants from Columbia Cares 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 29 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. CARING After-school drama program for 4th & 5th grade students Lunchtime club with Guidance counselor/Interns Attending Sat. APEX Reading Empowers program for Gr. 1 & 2 students and tutoring program for 3rd & 4th graders who scored Level 1 or 2 on the 2018 ELA test. Purchase books, dictionaries, supplies to use at home. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators hire teachers with input from staff (if potential candidates were student teachers). Interviews and demonstration lessons by prospective candidates ensure that teachers with sound educational philosophy and pedagogical expertise will be hired. Those teachers already on staff will engage in on-going professional development in literacy, math, science, social studies and ENL. Additionally, teachers will continue working with consultants in planning curriculum & enhancing their content knowledge; observe model lessons; collaborate with each other and Assistant Principals (former math coaches) in refining the Curriculum Frameworks and Pacing Calendar on each grade and aligning them with CCLS/Next Generation ELA/Math/Science Standards; attend workshops; participate in study groups and/or book clubs; and seek advanced degrees in education. We will continue to provide quality professional development through attending workshops Manhattan Field Service Center (MFSC); revising and refining our curriculum pacing calendar which is aligned with NYS standards; lesson studies in mathematics; inter-/intra school visits; attending science workshops offered by local institutions; and discussing strategies and curriculum planning in study groups (ESL team, ICT team). With current staff, we strongly encourage and have them apply for Professional Learning Opportunities (PLOs) with Office of English Language Learners (OELL), MFSC, Special Education Behavior Management workshops in order to ensure that they are enhancing their own teaching and learning skills. Our school has developed relationships with Fordham University, NYU, Pace University, Teachers College and Hunter College which have sent us a number of student teachers. We include student teachers in all educational activities and staff development, where possible, with the goal of recruiting highly qualified teachers who have training and philosophy aligned with our school community. Because we are a school which has developed a reputation of excellence, our most effective strategy is to continue to do the work that has enabled us to be classified as one of 209 high achieving schools in the city. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Principals & Assistant Principals will attend monthly administrators’ meetings offered by the Superintendent and the Instructional Support staff at the Manhattan Borough Field Center. 2018-19 CEP 35  ● Teachers will attend series of workshops/meetings offered by the following: 1. Special Education Liaison at MFSC 2. MFSC PD for Teachers on Co-teaching strategies 3. OELL PD for Teachers of ENLs 4. Next Generation ELA/Math/Science Standards 5. Workshops offered by OELL or MFSC for SE, GE and ENL teachers 6. PD for paraprofessionals offered by UFT or the MFSC Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-kindergarten teachers attend meetings with kindergarten teachers on curriculum and policy matters. They will provide narratives to parents at the end of the year with assessment information on reading, writing and mathematics areas. Copies will be placed in students’ cumulative records for kindergarten teachers to review. Pacing calendars are available to share among the teachers. PK teachers will inform Kindergarten teachers of intervention services that are provided to students with an Individualized Education Plan (IEP). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 36  Response To Intervention Leadership (RTIL) team reviewed various Universal Screeners and Progress Monitoring tools to select DIBELS. This assessment review was facilitated by AIR advisor. The MOSL Committee invited teachers on each grade to make decisions regarding the local measures for their Advance rating. The Professional Development Committee discusses and plans menu of Monday PD cycles of learning (topics of interest) as well as common grade meeting times interspersed throughout the school year. Members of the Teacher Leadership Program and the RTI Leadership Team will support grade level colleagues in Teacher Teams during Monday PD time periodically throughout the year in making meaning of assessment results to improve instruction plans and student grouping. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5E 5A, 5C 5A, 5C, 5D 5A 5A, 5C, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 338,510 27,752 28,494 5,511 3,889,896 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Yung Wing School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Yung Wing Elementary PS 124 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for parents to develop their parenting skills, student teaching skills, and advocacy skills to assist in the education of their children;  providing resources to support children's social emotional needs outside of classroom settings and in home environment. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 40  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● defining parent engagement time for parents and encouraging the usage of such time; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers, and providing training and professional development opportunities to volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are regularly given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress (both positive and negative developments); ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Yung Wing Elementary PS 124 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 41  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, our ENL student population is as follows: Kgn: EN - 2; EM - 13; TR - 11; EX - 15 1st Gr.: EN - 1, EM - 3 TR - 7; EX - 37; C - 9 2nd Gr.: EN - 1; EM - 1; TR - 4; EX - 27; C - 11 3rd Gr.: EN - 0; EM - 0 TR - 2; EX - 26; C - 18 4th Gr.: EN - 0; EM - 0; TR - 3; EX - 20; C - 9 5th Gr.: EN - 2; EM - 1; TR - 2; EX - 10 With Title 3 funding, students in grades 1, 2, & 4 who are in the EN, EM, TR and Low EX levels as well as below Not Meeting or Approaching benchmark levels based on DIBELS (school's progress monitoring tool) and/or Level 1, 2 and low 3 on the 3rd grade 2018 NYS ELA assessment will be served. Our ENL teachers who are ESL/TESOL certified will team-teach with the classroom teachers using guided, small group instructional model to provide support in reading, writing, technology and science. Language of instruction will be in English. Schedule: Gr. 1 Thurs. 2:30 - 4:30 PM, Gr. 2 Wed. 2:30 - 4:30 PM, Gr. 4 Wed. 2:30 - 4:30 PM Ratio for 1 class per grade will consist of 2 teachers ( ESL/TESOL certified & General Education) and 20 students. For ENL students they will receive extra opportunities to practice their listening and reading skills in the multimedia room from 2:30 - 4:30 PM beginning Feb. - May 2019 for 10 weeks by using school subscriptions to Imagine Learning, BookFlix and TrueFlix software programs. Increased individualized session times will help the students increase their language development and content knowledge for science and social studies. While students are using the school subscriptions, the two teachers will work with small groups to develop the four language skills - listening, reading, writing and speaking through shared reading, turn and talks and written responses. There will be an additional 4th grade group of 12-15 students focused on science enrichment taught by the science teacher and a Chinese bilingual certified teacher. They will meet once a week after school from on Wed. from 2:30 - 4:30 PM for 6 weeks from April - June 2019. Teachers will provide hands-on instructions and use videos from National Geographic to develop understanding of scientific concepts and vocabulary. Instruction will be done mostly in English with the bilingual teacher providing Chinese translations when necessary for the EN/EM students. An administrator will be supervising the program per session 2 days/week from 3 - 5 PM to during the 12 weeks. (Her official work day schedule is 7 AM - 3 PM.) Title III funds will be used to purchase the following instructional materials: Fountas & Pinnell's LLI readers, fiction & non-fiction texts (Vendor: BenchMarks, Inc.) and resources to strengthen literacy and oral language skills. Reader's Theatre materials will also be used to help with fluency and expressive language development. ESL strategies specifically designed to expedite language learning - teacher-guided reporting, listening activities, barrier "information gap" games, etc. - will be used to meet students' language needs. Parallel teaching and small 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information group/strategy groups will allow for 50% of direct instruction be be provided by the ENL teacher. 2 field trips will be organized to the Children's Museum of Manhattan and National Geographic to expose and increase their literacy, arts and science experiences. Unit theme will cover the water unit and living environments. Students in grades 1, 2 and 4 will attend. Dates in May/June to be determined based on availability of tickets and dates shows take place. Upon return from the shows, students will write a summary of what they observed and connect it to what they have learned in their unit of study using blank books and/or PowerPoint which will be shared with parents to celebrate their final products. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: One study group with up to 8 teachers (General Education and/or TESOL certified) in each group will meet in a 6 week cycle after- school from February - May, 2019 on either Wed. or Thurs, dependent on teachers' schedules to attend. Using Patterns of Power by Jeff Anderson, teachers will study and execute the routines and lessons on writing and the conventions of language. Teachers will discuss effective strategies and share how they are implemented in their classrooms. Title III funds would be used to purchase books and allocated for per session for participating teachers. Description below of school's PD during the year will be provided at no cost to Title III funding. This will provide ENL teachers with strategies and resources to support daily instruction with students as well as for them to share with general education teachers during grade team planning meetings. The ENL teachers will use an inquiry approach during Tuesday PD sessions to analyze data from NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results in order to determine strand(s) of weakness. Using this information, they will plan for differentiation of instruction and gather materials and resources to share with their colleagues and use for instructional purposes with their students. In addition, they will plan and facilitate workshops (cycle during 4 Monday PD sessions) for their grade colleagues on building academic vocabulary and fluency. ENL and classroom teachers who have students using Imagine Learning will receive professional development (October, 2018) on differentiating instruction, using data reports, lesson planning and developing classroom activities. Throughout the school year, ENL teachers will have opportunities to attend study groups for teachers of ELLs and Office of English Language Learners & Student Support-sponsored professional development series as well as workshops conducted by MFSC staff on ELL instruction. These include the following: EDAT Analysis Tool PD; Nuts and Bolts of ELL Programs: Critical ELL Components of Compliance. ENL teachers will also have opportunities to attend conferences offered by NYS/NYC Teacher Institute RBE-RN. M. Kauffman, ENL certified teacher will be attending Manhattan FSC ELL Leads meetings on dates TBD (2018-19) and bring back information to share with the ENL teachers regarding CR Part 154, compliance issues and other topics relevant for instructional practices that will support our student population. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Our TBE bilingual teacher, G. Lin, will continue to attend a series of five workshop sessions pertaining to TBE best practices to gain an understanding of the foundations of a TBE program and the steps required to implement an effective and sustainable program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental participation is critical and they need to be informed of how students are accessing and learning information in their classrooms, resources that support their understanding and processing of information, and ways they can continue monitoring and working with them at home. 2 ENL teachers will provide 2 hours of hands-on workshops for parents to be scheduled in December, 2018 (Reading topic), February, 2019 (writing topic), March, 2019 (Math topic), and May, 2019 (technology educational apps). They will be structured by grade bands (K-1, 2-3, 4-5) in order to demonstrate specific information and materials taught to students to expand their language learning and reading comprehension. Parents will have opportunities to practice strategies ENL teachers demonstrate to them during these workshop sessions. Title III per session funding will be allocated for teachers who will facilitate workshop presentations to parents. Three informational workshops will also be given by the principal, Alice Hom with translation provided by an ENL teacher (Tim Lai) or the parent coordinator (Christina Pun) in January, 2019 to give parents an overview of the NYS ELA, Math, Science, and in March, 2019 on NYSESLAT Assessments . Title III per session funding will be allocated for teacher who will be facilitating and translating during workshops with parents. Parents who attend field trips with their children will learn how to build language (oral and written) with their children by creating interactive and collaborative technology projects. They will attend the celebration during which their children will give an oral presentation of their book or PowerPoint slide show. Parents will be notified of these activities through the school's website/calendar, Class Dojo, flyers and newsletters distributed by school administration and/or PTA. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) We are Conceptually Consolidated.  Per session 2018-19 CEP 48 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Yung Wing Elementary Borough Manhattan School Number 124 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alice Hom Coach Kanyu (Pat) Kwan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Judy Ng/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Laura Lai/2nd Gr. Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Wong/Science Related-Service Provider Winnie Chan Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Melissa Helman Coach none School Counselor Lillian Moy Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Christina Pun Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) Minda Kauffman/ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 8 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 669 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 307 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.89%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 1 0 3 0 2 0 4 0 K 1 Lang. Mand Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 1 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 124 uses TCRWP running records, DIBELS, on demand writing pieces and teacher created assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The data reveals that while many of our ELLs are able to decode fluently, they lack proficiency in comprehension, inferencing and vocabulary development. Students in their writing need improvement in grammar structure and organization. During the regular day program, ELLs are given small group instruction focusing on literacy skills. Our school's instructional plan will be to implement with fidelity Fundations across grades K-2. Additionally, our ESL providers work with classroom teachers providing small group and guided reading instruction. The Imagination Learning and iRead programs will be used by ELLs on iPads/tablets/laptops to increase their reading comprehension and reading development. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 51  School-wide scheduled benchmark assessment periods with professional time allotted afterwards for grade teams to analyze data and develop lessons and/or activities to target specific skills for small group instruction. Literacy coach and administrators will periodically gather assessment results of student progress as well as identify students at risk to receive targeted instruction over a 6-8 week period. Information as well as resources will be uploaded via Google Drive for staff to view and continue the progress monitoring. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? DIBELS and Reading levels gathered from TC Running Records, Fountas & Pinell Benchmark Assessment System or DRA2 are baseline/benchmark assessments used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. The areas of need by grades based on NYSESLAT results are as follows: Gr. 1 - Speaking; Gr. 2 - 5 Writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Google Drive templates and excel sheets to input data recording conferences, action plan, provider, resources to implement with individual students and follow up date for review. RTIL team will analyze data to consider sharing either with whole staff/grade team members/individual classroom teacher and then discuss and develop short-term intervention plan. SIT team will also meet when a classroom teacher refers a child who is struggling in order to review his/her academic areas of need and then develop a cycle of AIS support before reconvening to consider next steps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on initial results of DIBELS, TCRWP running records and teacher recommendations, ELL students are identified for RTI. Our school uses the data to form small groups in the classroom for guided reading instruction provided by classroom teacher, ESL teacher and/or special education teacher (in ICT classroom). Additionally, some students are pulled out for RTI Tier 3 services. Students also attend Extended School Time programs for targeted small group instruction. The classroom teachers and ESL Support team plan instructional lessons based on students' levels and needs. At-risk intervention is provided by various service providers and assessments are then given after a period of intervention (6-8 weeks) to determine if the child's lack of progress is due to language or a learning disability. ESL teachers also provide professional development and/or consult with general education teachers on specific strategies and resources to implement with their ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA scores as well as results from DIBELS (our school-wide progress monitoring tool) are used to evaluate the progress our students make from year to year. Additionally, TC running records administered during benchmark periods help to inform progress made by students. These data inform and helps us target instruction toward students' areas of weakness. It also helps us to see which students are not make sufficient yearly progress so we can tailor our instruction to meet their needs or to seek different interventions and resources that might impact improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common grade periods once a week for teachers on a grade to meet when necessary to analyze student data or to plan lessons/activities that will support those in need of extra targeted instruction. In addition, there is the UFT 80 mins. on Mondays and 35 mins. on Tuesdays for information to be disseminated and for teachers in grade bands to discuss and make adjustments to their units of studies/lesson plans. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 52  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL teachers, in consultation with classroom teachers, prepare schedules that will provide students (based on their proficiency levels) with mandated number of stand alone and/or integrated ENL minutes. Students at the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels are grouped together for 180 minutes of stand alone ENL with a certified ENL teacher. Often Entering and Emerging students from two contiguous grades are grouped together Integrated ENL is provided by the ENL teacher inside the classroom for 180 minutes each week. Students are usually grouped heterogeneously during this time. b. TBE program. If applicable. The teacher of the TBE kgn. class will provide ENL instruction for all children in the classroom. She will provide 1 period per day of HLI and at least 1 period per day of content (Social Studies/Math/Science) instruction in Mandarin. She will also provide ELA instruction to all students. ELA instruction will consist of Reading and Writing Workshop. The teacher will also provide small group instruction based on needs and ENL mandates to provide more direct reading/writing instruction. Another ESL teacher will provide Integrated ENL services three times a week for 100 minutes and instruct Fundation lessons. c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Freestanding ENL program, ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to provide the mandated 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction for students in all proficiency levels Commanding students also receive their mandated 90 minutes of integrated instruction at this time. Students at the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels are grouped together for an additional 180 minutes of stand alone ENL with a certified ENL teacher. In our Kgn. TBE class, 180 minutes of HLA instruction is provided each week (35 - 40 mins./day, 5 days/week) by either the bilingual classroom teacher or the ENL teacher providing Integrated ENL instruction and 180 of bilingual instruction is provided by the bilingual classroom teacher in either Science or Social Studies content (depending on the unit of study during the school year). Another ESL teacher provides 35-40 minutes of Fundations instruction 3 times per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Freestanding ENL program, classroom teachers collaborate with ENL teachers to ensure that core content instruction is accessible to all our ENL students. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to scaffold instruction by using heterogeneous groupings, hands-on activities, charts and realia, small group instruction, shared reading/writing, guided reading/writing. Approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development include, but are not limited to: (1)Building background knowledge, (2)TPR techniques with beginners, (3)multi-level group work, (4)use of information gap activities, (5)use of mother tongue to facilitate beginning writing, etc. for Entering and Emerging level students. Books on tapes and Chinese-English dictionaries are also provided to support literacy skills. Visual aids and charts with pictures associated with the words or ideas are created and displayed in rooms to assist ENLs in the learning process. All instruction is in English. In the kgn. TBE class, HLA will be taught in Mandarin 35 minutes/day, 5 times a week in ELA. Social Studies and/or Science content areas will also be taught in Mandarin 35 minutes/day 5 times over the course of a week. Bilingual Chinese books on 2018-19 CEP 53  tape and non-fiction materials will be the resources the bilingual teacher uses during instruction of units that are CCLS aligned. Charts and other realia to support language learning will be displayed with English and Chinese characters to expose students to the Chinese written language. Grade planning/pacing calendars enable ESL teachers to address content topics and vocabulary. ESL teachers align projects with grade content focus and articulate with classroom teachers on a continual basis to ensure alignment with grade content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our students use Imagine Learning or iRead software programs which provide literacy and language acquisition activities in English and their native language. Teachers can generate reports to evaluate the students' progress. Students also use bilingual dictionaries, bilingual books with CDs. Entering level students are paired with a peer who speaks his or her native language and can help the student adjust and function in the classroom. The Testing Coordinator will identify ELLs who need to be evaluated on state assessments in their home language. Classroom and ESL teachers will be notified through testing memos of these students along with their testing accommodations. The ESL teachers provide sample assessments (i.e., NYS Science, NYS Mathematics) in the native language of the ELLs to determine whether or not the translations (i.e., Simplified or Traditional Chinese) can be read by the students. If the students indicate that they are able to read the questions in their native language, they are provided with the above mentioned formal evaluations in the translated formats. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction for each of the above ELL subgroups will include: guided reading groups, small group instruction, use of the software programs Imagine Learning or iRead, modified student tasks/assignments, peer tutoring, and provision of appropriate resources for possible project-based learning. a. For a SIFE student (which we don't have), the ESL teacher would assess him/her to determine instructional level and collaboratively work with the classroom teacher on accessing appropriate materials and modifying lessons to support instruction in the classroom. Extended School Day would be provided to increase learning time. b. For ELLs who are newcomers or are required to take the ELA test after one year, we provide 180 minutes of stand-alone instruction which includes Fundations for phonics development, vocabulary development using visuals and realia and the teaching of early literacy skills. We also provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL using visuals, sentence starters and frames, bilingual dictionaries and word banks. Our newcomer ELLs also have access to Imagine Learning or iRead software programs to promote language development. c. For Developing ELLS, we provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week. Our ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to provide language scaffolds to help the ELLs grasp the grade level content. Our ENL teachers provide instruction using graphic organizers, sentence frames and starters, shared reading, shared writing, sentence deconstruction, shades of meaning for vocabulary instruction, task differentiation and small group targeted instruction. d. For Long-Term ELLs, we would provide at risk intervention with an ESL  teacher during the school day (4X/week, 30 minute sessions) as well as provide Extended School Time. We might also refer the student for special education evaluation if we determine there is lack of progress that is not due to language. e. For former ELLs, we provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week. Our ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers to provide language scaffolds to help the ELLs grasp the grade level content. Our ENL teachers provide instruction using graphic organizizers, sentence frames and starters, shared reading, shared writing, sentence deconstruction, shades of meaning for vocabulary instruction, task differentiation, and small group targeted instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 54  Instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development for ELL-SWDs include: multi-level group work, reporting back, TPR techniques with beginners, use of information gap activities, hands on activities, use of visuals including charts and realia, emphasis on shared reading and modifications to the balanced literacy program. Books on tapes and Chinese-English dictionaries are provided to support literacy skills. Visual aids and charts with pictures associated with the words or ideas are created and displayed in rooms to assist ELLs in the learning process. Fundations and Imagine Learning (software program) are resources that provide our ELL-SWDs access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Strategies include, but are not limited to: (1) building background knowledge - previewing key concepts and challenging vocabulary & when possible, drawing on and using students' home languages; (2) close, interactive reading aloud - engage students in discussion about a big idea in the text; (3) storytelling using wordless books; (4) role playing and rehearsed oral performance; (5) language frames for speaking and listening; and (6) vocabulary learning strategies. Materials might include word sorts (Fundations), poems (for recitations), student-generated word lists, personal CD players to use with books on CDs and rebus charts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Integrated ENL Program is strongly encouraged so that the ESL teacher, SE teacher, or related service provider can provide instruction and support in the classroom. The schedule is designed to be flexible when possible so that ELL-SWDs are able to achieve their IEP goals with appropriate personnel and instructional resources that are Common Core aligned and rigorous enough to meet their learning needs and abilities. Our ESL teachers plan with the classroom teachers and are familiar with the content units of studies that are expected in the grades they work with. They engage in weekly curriculum planning based on the learning needs and abilities of the ELL-SWDs that they work with. When they push into the classroom, they provide instructional support to their mandated students who are learning alongside of their general education peers. In the upper grades (4 & 5), the ESL teacher might schedule push-in support for ELL-SWDs during periods when they are in science class. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For ELLs who are assessed as at-risk (based on results from DIBELS progress monitoring tool and/or TC running record of reading level), intervention services in English offered might include: student subscription of either Imagine Learning or iRead software program to build phonics skills, vocabulary development and reading comprehension skills; guided reading with classroom teacher and/or special education teacher (in ICT classrooms) and ESL teacher providing mandated services in either the Stand Alone or Integrated ENL program; 6-8 week cycle of informal services with related service provider (speech or occupational therapist) or the IEP teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we have again purchased mClass DIBELS as our school-wide progress monitoring tool as part of our RTI initiative. We are looking to build on the rigor and stamina of writing for our ELLs. This will be evidenced in the presentations they do after completing units of studies and/or publishing parties. We also will consider additional software resources such as iRead, Imagine Learning and National Geographic programs to engage students in non-fiction reading of social studies and science topics. With our Math teacher leader and administrators, we are also working towards enhancing math discussions in order to build oral language production with our ENLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA include Fundations (2nd edition), Great Leaps, Wilson,guided reading with Fountas & Pinell LL1 & LL2 kits, and software programs such as Imagine Learning, Learning A to 2018-19 CEP 55  Z, Bookflix and Starfall. Intervention services offered in the school are mainly in English unless student is EN or EM and service provider or classroom teacher speaks the native language. In those instances, Chinese may be used to support the child in understanding the content being taught. ELLs are offered equal access to any PTA after-school club, Extended Day tutorial classes, homework help or other after school clubs that are taught by school-based teachers. Teachers recommend ELLs for enrichment programs (i.e., APEX for Youth Sat. program) and invitations are sent and/or phone calls by the parent coordinator or family worker are made, highly encouraging parents to bring their child(ren). Applications for clubs are distributed in Chinese and English languages so that all parents have the opportunity to sign up their children. ENLs are offered opportunities to attend the summer Title III Enrichment program. With Title III funding, ENLs are taken on field trips to enrich their experiences and to build on their background knowledge. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have purchased many books - both fiction and non-fiction - that are Common Core aligned to meet the different reading levels of all our students, including ELLs with different proficiency levels across grades K-5. There are books on CDs/DVDs so that ELLs are able to borrow them over the weekend to read at home with their families. Picture dictionaries are purchased for the classrooms as well as for students to take and keep at home. Technology programs we have available for all our students include Imagine Learning, iRead, BookFlix, and Reading A-Z. For math instruction, we use manipulatives for all proficiency levels and bilingual glossaries for EN, EM and TR level students. In science and social studies, many visuals, videos, realia and graphic organizers are used to support our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, our students use Imagine Learning, an ENL software program which provides literacy and language acquisition activities in English and their native language. Teachers can generate reports to evaluate the students' progress. Students also use bilingual dictionaries, bilingual books with CDs as they transition to the English language. Alternate language paraprofessionals are assigned for SE ESL students who require that support as noted in their IEPs. Entering level students are paired with a peer who speaks his or her native language and can help the student adjust and function in the classroom. In our kgn. TBE class, bilingual fiction and non-fiction books are shared with students during class lessons. Books on CDs and software programs such as iRead or Imagine Learning are other resources that are sent home with parents after a workshop introducing these materials and demonstrating effective strategies to include them at home to connect with school learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After initial assessments, the ESL teacher and general classroom teacher communicate about what level the ELLs are at and then create a schedule of when required services (stand-alone or integrated) will be provided. Through weekly meetings between classroom teacher and ESL teacher, instruction is planned to ensure that the appropriate scaffolding is provided for the ENLs. Modifications and other strategies are shared by the ESL teacher with the classroom teacher. ESL teachers attend the common grade planning meetings and professional development workshops to collaborate with general education teachers on lesson planning and identifying materials and resources that would support instruction with ELLs. We have purchased many books - both fiction and non-fiction - that are Common Core aligned to meet the different reading levels of all our students, including ELLs with different proficiency levels across grades K-5. There are books on CDs/DVDs so that ELLs are able to borrow them over the weekend to read at home with their families. Picture dictionaries are purchased for the classrooms as well as for students to take and keep at home. Technology programs we have available for all our students include Imagine Learning, iRead, AWARD reading, BookFlix, StarFall and Reading A-Z. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share the building with another school. 2018-19 CEP 56  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ESL team has created and compiled a packet of information to orient newly enrolled ENLs and their families. There will be a breakfast orientation at the beginning of the school year sponsored by the PTA for all new parents (including those who students are identified as ENLs). Our guidance counselor also provides outreach to parents of ENLs to support them in transitioning to the school system and educational expectations. Translated flyers for all school programs or class activities are always distributed to ensure that families of ENLs are included in our parent population. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We use our Monday PD time for staff professional development which includes topics that pertain to our ELLs. As an example, we spent a PD cycle discussing how we can support our ELLs in their participation during math discussions. Another cycle focused on literacy activities with ELLs in mind. Staff also participate in off-site workshops centered on ELLs. For the past three years our ENL team participated in a Kellogg grant through the Asian American Federation. Teachers were in a cohort with other District 2 schools , visiting one another's classrooms and sharing best practices for our Asian-American ELLs. All ELL personnel have opportunities to attend a variety of professional development training workshops that are offered either by our Manhattan Borough Field Support Center or OELL. Within our school, the following professional development workshops will be planned, pending available funds or grants: Fay Pallen (ESL consultant) from Literacy Support; Metamorphosis Teaching & Learning (for math); NYSESLAT workshops planned by our ESL teachers. ESL teachers attend the common grade curriculum planning meetings to provide input on instructional strategies and resources that would align the CCLS unit of studies for ELLs. When outside organizations such aas NYS Statewide Language RBERN, MFSC or TOEFL advertise professional workshops or conferences, ESL teachers would have opportunities to attend at least one during the school year that would enhance their support of ELLs as they continue to engage in the CCLS. Through a three year Kellogg's grant, teachers of ELLs have inter-visitation days and network with colleagues from neighboring schools to observe and learn about differentiated strategies and programs which have positively impacted the academic progress of ELLs in each of their schools. An ESL consultant from Literacy Support provides workshops (2 hour sessions, 4 times/grade) to demonstrate strategies that will target vocabulary development and ways to deconstruct complex sentences/texts in a content area. They are able to attend at least two of the workshops offered throughout the school year by OELL. Additionally, we offer per session activities (Title III funding) for teachers of ELLs for book study groups or to plan curriculum with classroom teachers. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school has a Professional Development Committee which includes ENL certified teachers. In order for all teachers to meet the required 15% ELL-specific professional development for all teachers, these ENL teachers help to infuse our PD time on Mondays with ENL strategies and approaches that help our staff address the needs of ELLs as they engage with the CCLS. In addition, an ENL consultant facilitated a book study group focusing on the needs of ENLs. To meet the required 50% ELL-specific professional development for ENL/bilingual teachers, for the past three years, our ENL team has participated in a Kellogg grant through the Asian American Federation. Teachers were in a cohort with other District 2 schools, visiting one another's classrooms and sharing best teaching practices and resources. They also attend outside workshops through organizations such as NYS Statewide Language RBERN at NYU Steinhardt Metro Center and Professional Learning Opportunities (PLOs) offered by the Manhattan Field Service Center. This year, two ENL teachers attended the UFT ELLevating Conference as presenters and participants. The team of ESL teachers will collaboratively offer staff development during the Monday PD 80 minute blocks during a 3-4 week cycle, or as Title III per session activities to demonstrate and share best teaching practices for ELLs. The Language Enriched Classroom will be a possible text used for book study groups for professeional development purposes. Grade bands will work in cycles with the ESL consultant from Literacy Support on strategies and curriculum planning targeted for ENLs. Agendas and attendance sign in sheets along with hand-outs for workshops will be kept in a binder documenting year-long professional development meetings which our teachers participate in. Projected Professional Development Schedule: A cycle of 2-3 80 minute Professional development meetings on Mondays in November 2017 with the text Reading Strategies by Jennifer Serravallo to identify and try out reading strategies to targeted students based on results of DIBELS and TC running records. ESL teachers will collaborate with classroom teachers on ways they will support ENLs when they work with them during their Integrated ENL times. ESL teachers will also facilitate study groups in grade bands to during Tuesdays OPW times to share effective strategies such as sentence frames, deconstructing complex sentences to support classroom teachers. These will be scheduled during March, 2018. ESL teachers will attend workshops to enhance their own teaching and learning and they include some of the following opportunities: - UFT ELL Conference - Oct. 14, 2017 - MFSC ELL PD series - September 19, 2017; October 19, 2017; November 28, 2017; January 17, 2018; March 8, 2018 - "Essentials of a Transitional Bilingual Program" - October 26, 2017; November 14, 2017; December 5, 2017; January 23, 2018 (TBE teacher & Administrator) - EDAT Analysis Tool - TBA - Book Study group - January - February 2018 Possible titles: Unlocking English Learners' Potential by Dr. Diane Fenner & Dr. Sydney Snyder or Essential Linguistics, 2nd Edition by David E. Freeman & Yvonne S. Freeman Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 124 is a Title I SWP school and all parents, including parents of ELLs, are invited to all meetings and workshops that have translation provided by the parent coordinator, family worker or an ESL teacher. Notices are sent by ESL teachers to the parents of ELLs they instruct, inviting them in to attend conferences or workshops to discuss their children's language progress, 2018-19 CEP 58  to explain assessment results and strategies they can use at home to foster language acquisition. These meetings are planned for either the Tuesday Parent engagement times or as a 1st Period workshop during the morning. Throughout the school year, ENL teachers meet with individual parents to discuss the goals of the program, the child's progress, NYSESLAT or NYSITELL results, and their needs. When translation is needed, we use Over-the-Phone Interpretation service or the school's Parent coordinator or bilingual paraprofessionals. We send letters to parents requesting them to come meet with the ENL teachers. If they do not respond, a second notice is sent or the Parent Coordinator or bilingual family worker makes a call to set up a meeting with the ENL teacher. In case a parent cannot attend a meeting in person, teachers conduct the meeting over the phone. Teachers keep a log of when they meet with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school this year uses Class Dojo as a way to communicate with parents. Teachers or administrators post regular updates and photographs from their class to give parents a window into their child's classroom. All posts are available in English and Chinese, depending on parents' preference. Activities that foster parental involvement which have been planned throughout this school year include the following: parent orientations, parent workshops on CCLS/testing/homework help/ ways to help children in reading/writing, math family night, middle school application process, Cool Culture for the family (PK/Kgn), how to manage stress. Parents are encouraged to attend class publishing parties, performances (Winter Concert, Lunar New Year Celebration, Spring Concert) as well as to volunteer during class trips. In addition, parents are recruited to assist in our school library as well as during our school-wide book-fair and to assist during lunch recess in our school yard. Translation is offered through all events by the parent coordinator, family workers, ENL teachers or volunteers from groups that collaborate with our school. Projected parent engagement activities and workshops for this school year include the following: Nov. 8, 2017 - Fundations workshop Nov. 28, 2017 - Internet safety Dec. 2017 - Imagine Learning/iRead Apps Jan. 23, 2018 - Helping Children Self-Regulate and Cope with Emotion Feb., 2018 - Testing Workshop Mar. 6, 2018 - Friendship Cliques & Bullying May, 2018 - Effective Discipline Techniques June, 2018 - Self Care and Stress Management Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our school provides trips and activities that enrich the learning experiences of our ENLs within and beyond the classroom These include: 4th Gr. Operation Explore, 5th Gr. Farm for City Kids, Junior Theatre Festival, American Museum of Natural History, New York Historical Society, ABT, NYC Kids' Project and NYC Chess for Kids, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens and Broadway theatre productions. 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alice Hom, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Yung Wing Elementary School DBN: 02M124 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alice Hom Title Principal Melissa Helman Assistant Principal Christina Pun Parent Coordinator Judy Ng/ENL Teacher ENL/Bilingual Teacher TBD Parent Laura Lai/2nd Gr. Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Wong/Science Teacher/Subject Area Kan yu (Patricia) Kwan Lillian Moy Bonnie Laboy Yuet Chu Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Minda Kauffman Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M124 School Name: Yung Wing Elementary Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Christina Amy Tilly Pun Lee Chan conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Parent Coordinator Family Worker Pupil Accting. Secy. Yes No No Yes No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the point of registration, parents are interviewed by a certified ESL/bilingual teacher in order to complete the Home Language Survey. Emergency blue cards are filled out by parents and returned to the school during the first weeks of school. Noted on these cards is the language(s) understood by parents, which the office staff tabulates for each class. This data is used when school notices or other documents/booklets requiring translated versions are to be distributed to parents. Within the first 10 days of school, parents of students eligible for ESL services are invited to a meeting with administrator, ESL teacher and Parent coordinator and they learn about programs offered to support ELLs. At this time, they complete the Parent Choice form and this information is later entered into ATS. 2018-19 CEP 62  During conferences with teachers or parent meetings and workshops, if there are parents attending who require oral interpretation, the parent coordinator, family worker or a bilingual teacher will be present to provide language translations. All PTA notices or DOE letters are translated and sent home in a timely manner so parents are informed of activities or events which are pertinent to them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese, Any 433 Spanish Cantonese Korean Mandarin Bengali Japanese English Vietnamese 1 0 1 0 1 1 237 1 64.1 0.15 0 0.15 0 0.15 0.15 35.1 0.15 210 1 116 1 107 1 1 237 1 31.1 0.15 17.2 0.15 15.8 0.15 0.15 35.1 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Mandarin, Cantonese, Chinese (Any), English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 63  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September 2018 Monthly November 2018 March 2019 Monthly Parent Handbook of School Regulations PTA Newsletter Notices for Parent Teacher Conferences PTA meeting agenda and summary of topics addressed Monthly SLT minutes - posted on Parent bulletin board and on school's website Flyers announcing parent Orientations Workshops with resources disseminated (NYS testing, Common Core Learning Standards, Social -emotional topics, etc.) September 2018 November 2018 January 2019 February 2019 March 2019 May 2019 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Family worker & Parent coordinator translated in June 2018 Family worker & Parent volunteer, 1 week before beginning of month Family worker & Parent Coordinator, 2 weeks prior to PTC to set up meeting times with teachers Parent volunteer using Google Translator Translator through www.ps124m.org website Parent Coordinator - first day of school Family worker, parent coordinator, bilingual teachers - translated 1-2 weeks before workshop 2018-19 CEP 64  After school program applications Parent notices of special events (NDI, winter concert, Lunar New Year celebration, Parent engagement) September 2018 November 2018 April 2019 September 2018 December 2018 January 2019 February 2019 May 2019 Family worker, pupil secretary, parent coordinator, administrators Family worker, parent coordinator, collaborating organizations Middle School Application process & dates for MS tours Sept./Oct. 2018 Family worker & parent coordinator 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent orientation by grades September 18, 2018 Parent Engagement events during which informal interactions between staff & parents will occur. September 20, 2018 May 15, 2019 Middle School Application process Parent engagement meetings (arranged by individual teachers) interpretation service(s)? Bilingual paraprofessionals, teachers, related service providers, volunteers from community Bilingual teachers, family worker, parent coordinator 2018-19 CEP 65  Cool Culture meeting with PK & Kgn. parents October 22, 2018 Tuesdays 2:30 - 3:15, Weekly November 2018 Guidance counselor, interns, family worker, parent coordinator Bilingual teachers, related service providers Parent Teacher November 15, 2018 Conferences March 15, 2019 Parent coordinator & family worker Over the Phone Translation Unit, Bilingual Parents, school aide, volunteers from CBOs IEP meetings (Initial, annual, triennial) Throughout year based on compliance dates Bilingual psychologist, social worker, related service providers, teachers November 2018 January 2019 February 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Curriculum & health workshops for parents Bilingual teachers, parent coordinators, Translators from outside agencies providing workshop 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, our bilingual personnel (family workers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator and teachers) will upload translated notices on our www.ps124m.org website and Class Dojo, call parents or use 2018-19 CEP 66  WeChat to communicate with limited-English proficient families. Notices in English and Chinese will be posted on outdoor school bulletin boards and/or sent home school-wide. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During Faculty meeting on Mon. /Tues. PD times, administrators will inform staff of policies and procedures as per Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and disseminate resources pertaining to language access for all parents. Occasional grade meetings, when necessary, are also ways we address translation needs and procedures. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signs including those listed above will be posted by Security Desk where parents are required to sign in. Information of Language Assistance Services will be included in the school's Parent Handbook and posted on the school's website. On notices distributed to parents, a check-off will be added for parents to indicate if they will need a translator. Any notification documents pertinent to our families that are on the Translation & Interpretation Unit's intranet site (http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and _interpretation_unit) will be download and distributed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey distributed by SLT in February/March Feedback at PTA monthly meetings Agenda item during SLT meeting after Parent-Teacher conferences Cool Culture survey distributed to parents in January/June Face-to-face meetings with individual LEP parents to gather feedback and needs With feedback we gather, we continue to try and access additional resources (technology, volunteers) to improve language services for parent-teacher communication. 2018-19 CEP 67 
