2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M128 School Name: P.S. 128 AUDUBON Principal: CARY PANTALEON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Audubon School 310600010128 Pre-K - 5 th Grades School Number (DBN): 06M128 560 West 169 th Street, New York, NY 10032 212-927-0607 212-781-8002 Phone Number: Fax: Cpantal@schools.nyc.gov Cpantal@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Cary Pantaleon Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Kim Hanson- Fleming Lucia Bravo and Luis Rodriguez Kim Hanson- Fleming SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alexandra Sanchez N/A N/A Manhattan- 06 Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, New York, NY 10032 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-529-3757 Phone Number: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, NY, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: 212-356-7546 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cary Pantaleon KimHanson- Fleming Luis Rodriguez N/A Patricia Villarreal N/A N/A SolangelPimentel HeribertaOsoria Katie Gurba Idalia Machuca *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Out of Classroom Member/ Cluster and Grade 5 Member/ Pre-K to Grade 1 Member/ 2nd to 4th Grades 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Alicia Betancourt Yolanda Encarnacion Patricia Sanchez Lucia Bravo Esmeralda Garcia Norma Reynoso Patricia Villareal DanilsaVargas Michelle Ann Colindes Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ AISand ESL Member/ Paraprofessionals Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  P.S. 128M’s vision is to education the whole child while instilling a passion for lifelong learning. We believe that children learn best when practices are purposefully connected and when they are provided with multiple entry points, in order to achieve high standards of academic excellence and to flourish into responsible and resourceful citizen. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The PS 128M learning community, consisting of the staff, parents and community based organizations, work collaboratively to create a safe and nurturing child-centered environment in which students’ cultural experiences, physical, social and emotional development are integrated with the educational process. We provide students with all available tools and resources to foster critical thinking skills in order to empower them to be contributing, responsible future citizens of their communities, as well as, be able to compete in the changing global economy. The School Leadership Team (SLT) consisting of representatives from each constituency, provides guidance and participates in the decision making process. In addition to the SLT, PS 128 has several teams that contribute to instructional plans, assessment decisions, and various other programs/events that impact students, families and staff. This includes, but is not limited to, horizontal and vertical Teacher Teams, the Cabinet, the Professional Development (PD) Team, the MOSL Team, the Child Study Team (CST), the School Implementation Team (SIT), just to name a few. Each team includes representation from different school cohorts such as special education, ELLs, grade leaders, and content specification. Parent outreach focuses on family literacy, parenting skills, parent leadership and enhancing their knowledge of community resources. The parent coordinator facilitates all parental involvement components that include participating in the SLT, school events/programs, Parents’ Association activities and meetings, the school volunteer program, weekly workshops, school committees as well as adult education classes. There are weekly parent workshops based on a needs’ assessment, in addition to those presented by individual grades and/or teachers. The Principal also meets regularly with the Parents Association Executive Board in a continuous effort to keep them informed and obtain their ideas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 128M strives for academic excellence and to ensure high quality instruction for all students, especially our English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD). Clear expectations and academic rigor, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards is pivotal in all instructional plans, including a balanced literacy program, a Math Action Plan that includes manipulative materials, games, and data driven small group activities. This includes problem solving processes and application of mathematical concepts to real life situations. Students are also provided with supplemental instruction as part of intervention, based on data analysis. Instructional plans also include the integration of writing, Social Studies and Science, as well as technology. Diagnostic prescriptive instruction based on data analysis is provided to meet our students’ needs. All mainstream curriculum and programs are paralleled in Bilingual and Special Education classes. Moreover, all instructional plans are modified throughout the school year based on students’ needs and data analysis. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One of the elements of the Framework in which we made some improvement is Rigorous Instruction. In order to better serve our students and address their needs, we we have modified the structure, the time, components and resources for the English Language Arts (ELA) and Math curriculum. Specifically, for ELA, we understood that our students need more support in order to manipulate and comprehend the text as part of this program. Hence, our ELA Plan includes differentiation, guided instruction, independent leveled texts, and vocabulary work, as well as phonemic 2018-19 CEP 10  and phonics activities for the lower grades as needed. Similarly, our Math Plan includes differentiation, guided practice, more hands on activities and additional math time. Our Media Center was also evidence of more rigorous work. Students were able to research topics and create different forms of presentations via slide shows, photo essays, etc. The Media Club engaged in Robotics and Coding as part of their program. While we made some progress, we will continue to improve current practices and add new experiences. Thus, for the 2018-2019 we will revise both the ELA and Math Plans to include additional resources that can better support our children. We are also revising our Writing Instructional Plan to include more genres and grammar conventions. Finally, in an effort to integrate academic subjects, we have connected with Columbia University to develop an integrated curriculum with a STEAM focus. PS 128M has and continues to be focused on providing each child with optimal learning opportunities in order for them to become future contributing citizens. More importantly, we emphasize on creating a warm and motivating culture for all students, staff and parents. This goal will be attained by our dedicated professionals through ongoing collaboration. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M128 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 586 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 43 32 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 43 39 32 32 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 24.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 94.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.79 2% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 32 91.5% 6.0% 19.3% 1.5% 1.9% 0.7% 6 4% 8.7 31.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the 2018 I-Ready Math Assessment indicates that 45.78% of the students in grades 3-5 scored at a Level 1 in the beginning of the year(BOY). By the end of the year(EOY) 37.09% scored at a level 1. This shows a decrease of 8.69% in level 1's in grades 3-5 from BOY to EOY. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 4% decrease in the number of Level 1 students, grades 3-5, in Math, as measured by I-Ready assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math curriculum units will be adjusted, to integrate a secondary curriculum, Ready NY (Grades 3-5) to improve student achievement. Teachers will revise instruction based on data analysis that will include a weekly 45 minutes session of I-Ready in order to determine growth and modify instructional moves. During data inquiry CPLC meetings, teachers will analyze I- Ready benchmark and progress monitoring assessments, formative assessments, math quizzes, authentic student work, portfolios, integrated projects, student discussions through the use of rubrics During CPLC Teachers will participate in Professional Learning sessions to foster their understanding of Math talks, Rigorous math activities, fluency, and math inquiry. Students will participate in School wide Math activities, such as Math Fluency Bee, 100th Day of School activities, Math PI Day, as well as, integrated projects, i.e., STEM, MST Fair, in order to implement rigorous math content and instructional shifts. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018- Teachers Students Teachers and Students in Grades 3-5 June 2019 Oct 2018, Feb 2019, May 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Coaches, and Teachers Coaches, and Teachers Coaches , Lead Teachers, and Teachers Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Students Sept. 2018- K-5 June 2019 Administration, Coaches, and Teachers Teachers, & select staff Teachers will plan and implement differentiated instruction and tasks to address students' needs, including advanced learners. Students K - 5 Sept. 2018- Teachers Professional development will be customized in the form of learning labs, inter visitations, tutorials, webinars, video clips, off-site training and learning walks based on teachers' needs Teachers Coaches and Teachers June 2019 Nov. 2018 Feb. 2019,March and May 2019 Parent newsletters, workshops, and conferences will take place to foster parents' understanding of CCLS Math and to help them support their children with complex CCLS-aligned content in Math. Parents Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Coaches and Teachers Additional AIS support through I-Ready and small group instruction will be provided to all level 1 students and groups will be adjusted based on progress monitoring. Teachers and Students in Grades 3-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, Coaches, and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The instructional coaches, and/ or the parent coordinator will help engage families by providing workshops to support families' understanding of rigorous math instruction on a bimonthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for per session for teacher planning, professional development, and Instructional Lead meetings as well as for per diems for professional development participation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 2% of level 1 students will show improvement in Math as measured by I-Ready assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) I-Ready Benchmark math assessments, class work, integrated projects and portfolios. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of the 2018 I-Ready ELA Assessment indicates that 45.73% of the students in grades 3-5 scored at a Level 1 in the beginning of the year(BOY). By the end of the year (EOY) 46.86% scored at a level 1. This shows an increase of 1.13% in level 1's in grades 3-5, from BOY to EOY. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% decrease in the number of Level 1 students, grades 3-5, in ELA as measured by the I-Ready Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will analyze student work, create rubrics and assessments in order to clarify learning expectations. Students will then utilize checklists, rubrics, and teacher feedback to guide their work and self-assess their progress. Teachers Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration ELA curriculum units will be adjusted, to integrate a secondary curriculum, Ready NY (Grades 3-5) to improve student achievement. Teachers will revise instruction based on data analysis that will include a weekly 45 minutes session of I-Ready in order to determine growth and modify instructional moves. Additional AIS support through I-Ready and small group instruction will be provided to all level 1 students and groups will be adjusted based on progress monitoring. Teachers will scaffold discussion protocols and use a variety of discussion strategies and best practices to encourage equal participation, and student independence. Teachers will assign roles, such as, facilitator, recorder, time-keeper, summarizer, presenter, and materials manager during collaborative group work to foster shared responsibilities, peer collaboration and accountability, as well as ownership of learning. Teachers will engage in purposeful planning, in alignment to the CCLS and across the grade. Data-driven lessons will include clear learning targets, and scaffolds, as needed, to ensure differentiated entry points. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration Teachers and Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration All Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration K-5 All students, K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Lead Teachers, Coaches All Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration Teachers will use exemplar student work to demonstrate expectations as indicated by rubrics. All Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Lead Teachers K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coaches and Administration During CPLC Teachers will participate in Professional Learning sessions that will foster their understanding of a Balanced Literacy and Writing Approach. Teachers will learn how to set student goals in order to help students' reach mastery. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 17  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The administration, instructional coaches, and teachers will engage parents twice a year during Parent Teacher Conferences in November of 2018 and March of 2019, as well as Curriculum night September 2018, and monthly Parent Workshops from September 2018-June 2019 in order to support parents in ways in which they can help their children, in literacy, at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for per session for teacher planning, professional development, and Instructional Lead meetings as well as for per diems for professional development participation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 2% of level 1 students will show improvement in ELA as measured by I-Ready assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready Benchmark ELA assessments, class work, integrated projects and portfolios. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  An analysis of the MOTP Summary, indicated that teachers need to continue to improve planning coherent instruction  The 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, collaborate teachers survey question indicated that teacher were at 4.07%. The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, collaborate teachers survey question indicated that teacher were at 3.68%, a decrease of 0.39%.  Teacher practices are inconsistent across the grade/classes as evident by informal and formal observation  Implementation of feedback are inconsistent across the grades/classes Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have completed one cycle of professional development around data analysis, data driven instruction or progress monitoring. They will implement strategies learned into their instructional practice as evidenced by unit and/or lesson plans, formal and informal observations. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the Individual Planning Conferences (IPCS) at the beginning of the school year, supervisors will review the previous school year’s data to help establish goals and next steps for teachers. Teachers will be encouraged to set professional goals based on their MOTP and school instructional goal. They will create targeted learning goals to ensure that students are engaged in creative and critical thinking opportunities through questioning, student-centered and discussions, as well as reflective practices Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018- Oct. 2019 Supervisors , Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Supervisors, and Teachers Teachers will meet during CPLC to participate in purposeful planning that will focus on data driven instruction. Hallmark 5: Teachers will use school wide protocols to support rigorous planning. Teachers will continually monitor student progress by allowing multiple assessment opportunities for improvement. Teachers Teachers Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Supervisors, and Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Supervisors, and Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Supervisors, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Teachers will meet once a month during CPLC to assess strengths and weaknesses of students’ through Inquiry work and develop next steps. Teachers will work collaboratively in creating and norming rubrics. Teachers have high expectations for their students which focus on academic achievement by evaluating drafts and published writing pieces through the content areas. Teachers will participate in inter-classroom visitations as part of the reflective practices which will help teachers work collaboratively in planning for successful student outcomes. Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Supervisors, and Teachers Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Lead teachers, Teachers Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Supervisors, and Teachers, Teachers will engage in professional development which are aligned specifically to reach the goal. Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Teachers will continually monitor student progress by allowing multiple assessment opportunities for improvement. Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Supervisors, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers Supervisors, Instructional Coaches, Lead Teachers, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support Collaborate Teachers and promote teacher/ parent communications, the parent coordinator will hold bi-monthly parent workshops to share general data and strategies for student success at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for per session for teacher planning, professional development, and Instructional Lead meetings as well as for per diems for professional development participation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will have completed one cycle of professional development around data analysis, data driven instruction or progress monitoring. They will implement strategies learned into their instructional practice as evidenced by unit and/or lesson plans, formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.   Informal/Formal Observations Learning Walks Assessment Data, including but not limited to, F & P, EnVision Benchmark Assessments, Ready NY Benchmark Assessments, Authentic Student Work, Integrated Projects and Portfolios Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  An analysis of the Child Study Team (CST) referrals, indicates students being referred due to behavior.  An analysis of the Online Occurrence Reporting System indicates that for the 2016- 2017 we had 53 cases (9.78%). In the 2017- 2018 school year we had 62 cases (11.63%), that is an increase of 1.85% in the number of OORS cases.  The school's attendance data indicates a correlation between attendance, lateness and behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will engage in developmentally appropriate wellness instruction, as part of daily learning, in order to develop and maintain health related fitness awareness, as measured by student participation. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Form a School Wellness Council (SWC). Nominate and identify school wellness coordinators and discuss the role of the wellness team with the school. PE Teachers Sept. 2018 Schools Administrators, PE Teachers, School Support Staff Schools Administrators, PE Teachers Schools Administrators, PE Teachers, School Support Staff SWC Schools Administrators, Teachers, School Support Staff School Administrators, Teachers, School Support Staff Schools Administrators, School Support Staff Sept. 2018- June 2019 SWC, Attendance Committee Students Students, Teachers, Parents Targeted Students Targeted Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018- June 2019 Review OSWP website for free physical activity programs for the school, and poll physical education teachers regarding the best possible programs for students, based on developmental appropriateness. Teachers, support staff, and families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Engage the Wellness Council and other stakeholders to generate a School Wellness Score Card (SWSC) that monitors student progress throughout the school year. Teachers, support staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Create additional school wide wellness activities based on student interest/ need. Teachers will develop and implement interdisciplinary lessons for understanding and using the SWSC. Work with attendance committee to identify students who are chronically absent, and target them for participation in before school programs. (Example: Basketball Club) In an effort to better support students, we will continue with our Adopt a Student Program, however, this year we will select students with behavior, attendance and lateness issues. Paraprofessionals will be trained on the CAM Trauma Informed Curriculum in order to get a better understanding of how to engage students in positive behavior management 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Wellness Coordinators will help engage families by giving them workshops to support their understanding of the School Wellness Council, and other, school wide activities on a quarterly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for per session for teacher planning, professional development, and Instructional Lead meetings as well as for per diems for professional development participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 60% of students will engage in developmentally appropriate wellness instruction, as part of daily learning, in order to develop and maintain health related fitness awareness, as measured by student participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Administration, along with the Child Study Team, and the SWC coordinators will:  Analyze individual student plans  Review Child Study Team Agendas and referrals  2018-2019 Attendance Data  Before school club participation  Analyze the School Wellness Score Card Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 128 has an extensive parental involvement component that includes parent representation as part of the SLT, weekly parent workshops and courses, curriculum fairs, regular meetings with the principal, etc. However, an analysis of parents’ attendance sheets, agendas and surveys indicates limited participation by parents in grade 3-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will show a 10% increase in parent participation, as measured by the school survey. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal will continue to meet with the PA Executive Board biweekly. Parents and Guardians Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Simultaneous translations will be available for Non-English speaking parents during all events/meetings Parents and Guardians Sept.2018- June 2019 School Staff Parent Coordinator PA Parent Coordinator The Parent Handbook, which will include a calendar of events, workshops, meetings will be distributed to all parents at the beginning of the school year. It will be available electronically and in paper copy. Periodic reminders will be sent home in the parents’ preferred language. . The PA Executive Board will conduct a needs assessment to prioritize topics and preferred times for workshops/courses. They will collaborate with community based organizations to increase the availability of resources. Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator June 2019 Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018- Parents’ Association Jan. 2019 The PA will alternate monthly meetings between mornings and evenings in order provide parents with options and flexibility. Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018- Parents' Association Additional activities will be included to equip parents with strategies to support students at home and to promote family participation and, such as Family Fun Day, Family Game Nights, Family Field Trips, Career Day, For Parents by Parents Workshops, Parent and Child Workshops, Use of outside resources, etc. Parents and Guardians June 2019 Oct. 2018- May 2019 Parents Association, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers Additional workshops for parents in grades 3-5 will be provided in order to ensure that parents understand and can support the I-Ready ELA/ Math system at home. Parents and Guardians Oct. 2018- Principal May 2019 School Staff A “Parent Email System” will be implemented to help facilitate ongoing communication with all parents. Parents and Guardians Sept.2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26 Parent Coordinator PA  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Fresh Youth Initiatives, Beacon, Boy Scouts of America, Rena COA, Chalk, Cookshop,and L-Feld- NYU, are the Community Based Organizations that support family and community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for per session for teacher planning, professional development, and Instructional Lead meetings as well as for per Diem substitutes for professional development participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent participation, Grades 3-5, as measured by agendas, surveys, and attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Administration, along with the parent coordinator will:  Review attendance sheets  Conduct and analyze a mid-year agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Beginning of Year Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  Interactive Writing F & P  Guided Reading Class Profile sheets  Literacy Games  Reading is Enlightening (RIE)  ELL Academy – 2 nd to 5 th Grades  Guided group instruction  Varied resources Words Their Way; Wilson; Voyager Passport, , Reading Rescue and the F&P Leveled Literacy Intervention , and Computerized supplemental support: Compass Learning Odyssey (CLO), I-Ready ELA, Imagine Learning (IL), etc. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  Differentiation oftasks as part of the ELA block  AISwill be provided threeto five times a week for 30 minutes  Diagnostic prescriptive instruction for targeted students in small groups of four to six  RIE five days a week for 45 minutes  ELL Academy two hour sessions, twice a week  RIE- additional push-in support as part of the ELA for 3 rd to 5 th grades  ELL Academy - supplemental after school support to develop language for ELLs, in groups of 10-12 One to one tutoring for targeted students, twice a week 2018-19 CEP 28  Mathematics Beginning of the Year – Envision Baseline Assessment  Guided Math groups  Differentiation of math tasks as part of instructional block  Math games – 30 to 40 minutes per week Class profile sheets  Weekly Math Challenges – for 3 rd through 5 th grades Science Beginning of the Year Teacher made assessments Social Studies Beginning of the Year Teacher made assessments  Math Games Clinics Supplemental resources, i.e., GoMath, I-Ready Math, Eureka Math,CLO and IL  Field trips aligned to standards and concepts  Computerized supplemental instruction - CLO, IL Extended activities are integrated into the daily instructional plan  Classroom leveled libraries support curriculum units  Media Club Science Textbooks are aligned to standard based instruction  Classroom libraries support curriculum units  CLO & IL supplemental instruction  Multicultural Fair  One additional period of math per week  Math Science Technology (MST) Fair allows for real life application  Math games – small groups, differentiated Long-term projects to foster/reinforce math concepts  CLO – individualized learning paths  Imagine Learning – individual Media Club – one to two times per week  Weekly 100 minute Science block to secure hands-on science experiments  Opportunities for real life science exploration through field trips  Math Science Technology (MST) Fair – real life application Media Club – twice a week STEM Projects  CLO program – individual  100 minutes Weekly S.S. block  ILearning – individual Small group – Multicultural Fair and events  Opportunities for real life S.S. exploration through field trips  Multicultural Fair 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Child Study Team (CST) meets bi-monthly to review and determine services for At-risk students based on teachers recommendation and student data Monthly celebrations – real life application Support is provided on an individual and/or group basis, during the day, after school and/or off-site depending on the program and the family’s availability Monthly celebrations aligned to units  CST  On-Site Full time Columbia Presbyterian Clinician  Mandated Counseling  Crisis, At-Risk and Preventive counseling  Adopt-a -Student  Alianza Dominicana  Washington Heights Coalition Harlem Services  Individual and group counseling by school counselors  Family counseling and individual therapy by Community Based Organization Partnerships  Preventive Strategies via Weekly Parent Workshops Individual support to students through new initiative: Adopt-a-Student 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will continue to provide STH students with free materials such as uniforms, school supplies, books, backpacks and other additional resources. They will be linked with the school social worker and guidance counselor in order to provide social-emotional support . They will also be linked with an intervention teacher to provide academic support through use of researched based intervention programs such as Voyager Passport and Wilson. This population will be discussed and tracked as part of the Child Study Team (CST) meetings. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 128 uses various strategies and activities to recruit, retain and assign highly qualified teachers, resulting in a low turnover rate. To fill vacancies, we use the Teacher Finder and Open Market. The principal also reaches out to the district office, other principals, as well as the Human Resource director for recommendations. Candidates will be interviewed by the principal and a hiring committee, comprised of the UFT Chapter Leader, and select lead teachers and coaches. Potential candidates will also be expected to present their portfolio, letters of recommendation, sample lesson plans as well as copies of all licenses and degrees. In addition, candidates are expected to model a lesson and/or a part of a lesson. Teachers' preferences are honored as best as possible. Similarly, Staff Spirit, Holiday Celebrations, and School Social Committee activities boost staff morale and aid in retention. Teachers will then be provided with on-going high quality differentiated professional development in areas such as STEM, Common Core Aligned Balanced Literacy, and Common Core Aligned Math, and technology and media (Interactive Promethean Boards). Furthermore, staff will attend Professional Development offered throughout the year from the Manhattan Field Support Center. Finally, official mandated mentoring is provided for new teachers twice a week, along with a grade buddy for additional support and unofficial mentoring. Instructional coaches provide support for all teachers in the form of professional development, scheduling, lesson planning, and classroom management. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS 128 has an extensive and differentiated professional development system to support all teachers, school leaders, paraprofessionals and especially new hires. . The following system is utilized for all staff members regardless of the years they have been teaching:  Differentiated professional development sessions are provided based on school goals, NYSED and DOE expectations, as well as staff needs. 2018-19 CEP 33   The school PD is truly a living document, constantly modified throughout the school year, based on supervisory observations, coaches’ viewing of instruction and the teachers’ goals established as part of the IPC meetings.  The PD plan also triangulates teachers based on their performance and progress, in order to address common individual needs, while fostering peer coaching.  Low performing teachers create a customized Individual Support Plan (ISP) collaboratively with supervisors to provide specific support as needed. ISPs include specific goals, and clear next steps; they are visited at least twice a year to monitor teachers' growth.  Coaches are assigned to support individuals teachers based on the customized ISPs, as well as specific grades.  Structured schedules facilitate weekly CPL sessions that allow teachers to engage in the inquiry process around student work and plan coherent instruction as measured by the Danielson Framework. The PD Team meets at least four times during the school year to review and modify professional development goals and next steps. Paraprofessionals:  Training and Professional Development specific to paraprofessionals assignments s provided on the school level by Instructional Coaches and Assistant Principals and at the District level once a month to support students' ability to meet the Common Core Standards.  Ongoing SESIS training is provided  Differentiated professional development sessions once a week based on school goals, NYSED, and DOE expectations.  Manhattan Field Support Center offers paraprofessional training in various topics to support students' ability to meet Common Core Standards  District 6 offers Professional Development on designated PD days to support Common Core Standards Schools Leaders:  New School Leaders are provided with mentoring and a buddy peer to facilitate professional development.  Manhattan Field Support provided professional development throughout the school year  District 6 provides monthly study groups and professional development for school leaders  Supervisors also use the CSA ELI PD services Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The transition plan for all incoming students, especially preschool children begins with a Welcome Orientation for the parents on the first day of school. At that time we distribute the Parent Handbook and literature about supporting early childhood learners at home. Approximately, for the first two weeks of school, parents are invited to remain in the classroom with the students to ensure that the children are comfortable in their new learning environment. Around the end of the September, we host another Parent Orientation for all grades, including Pre-K and kindergarten. During this session parents are provided with the expectations students must accomplish by the end of the school year, as well as specific teacher requirements. All students coming from other early childhood programs retain their related services. The Pre-K DOE social worker provides weekly support to classes and/or students and their families on a case by case basis. The social worker also provides support to parents on the referral process as needed to ensure that students receive early intervention services, such as speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and counseling. These services are provided by in-house staff and if not outside providers are contracted to provide these services. Workshops for Pre-K and Kindergarten parents and teachers are also presented. Toward the end of each school year, we begin to transition the pre-K students into some of the school’s regular routines to ensure that they are ready for kindergarten. Finally, Pre-K teachers plan with kindergarten to better align instruction, transition to children's stages of development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All decisions regarding the selection of assessments are made in conjunction with the teachers’ input, and with the MOSL Team’s recommendations. Assessment options are reviewed by the MOSL Team and presented as part of the SLT that contains representatives of all stakeholders. In turn, they contribute to decisions by sharing the opinions and choices of their constituents. Teachers also have an opportunity to discuss and weigh in assessment options during their secured CPL sessions. Similarly, the administration shares assessment options with the CPL Team as part of planning for professional development. Finally, the MOSL Committee evaluates the assessment options and makes recommendations to the Principal for each grade and cohort of teacher; the principal then either agrees with and/or declines their recommendation. Student assessments are analyzed during monthly data meetings (Supervisors and 2018-19 CEP 35  teachers; cabinet meetings; SLT; Teacher Teams). Teachers Teams determine formative assessments that will be part of instructional units. Professional development is then provided by based on data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 36 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 363,421.00 299,338.00 23,758.00 2,041.00 3,249,058.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section5, Goals A-E, Parts 4 A and B Section5, Goals A-E, Parts 4 A and B Section 6 Section5, Goals A-E, Parts 4 A and B Section5, Goals A-E, Parts 4 A and B  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 128M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Title 1 Meetings are held in October to give parents information regarding rights and requirements and purpose of Title 1. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [PS128M] will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing materials and training to help parents support their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Parents are informed of Title 1 requirements and the rights of parents through SLT parent members , Monthly Parent Association Meetings, as well as the Parent Coordinator by Oct. 30th deadline. A General Parent Associations meeting is held specifically to discuss Title 1 and its use. In addition, to increasing and improving parent involvement and school quality, the school will: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 CEP 39  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., Every Student Succeeds Act( ESSA), student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 40  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template PS128M , in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act, will ensure that the School-Parent Compact will strengthen and support student achievement. Staff and parents of students participate in activities and programs funded by Title I, and agree that this Compact outlines how parents,staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement. This school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve academic success on all assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) , Every Student Succeeds Act ( ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 128 M. will offer our English Language Learners (ELLs) in grades 2 through 5, a supplemental Saturday program which will concentrate on the development of all strands of language acquisition which includes: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The Saturday Title III LEP Supplemental Program will provide staff an opportunity to meet individual student needs in a small group setting through a diagnostic-prescriptive approach. The ELL supplemental program will target approximately 60 students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of proficiency as determined by the NYSESLAT. In addition, this program will also include SIFE students in grades 4-5, as well as some SWDELL students. Groups will be comprised of 10-12 ELL students. The ELL program will meet for three hours, on Saturdays for 12 weeks, November through February. Teachers will provide instruction in the areas of literacy and math in order to ensure higher academic achievement and College and Career readiness. The goal of the program is to support our ELLs in grades 2-5 in becoming competent writers and thinkers. Instruction will focus on reading comprehension, vocabulary development, critical thinking and content area writing. Through the writing component, the students will learn to write in every Common Core genre: informative, narrative and opinion. The students will also apply research and writing skills to real-world writing assignments, such as writing articles for the IndyKids Newspaper. Also, Math word problems will be used to enhance academic vocabulary. In addition, the After School Title III LEP Supplemental Program will have a Art-Common Branch teacher and a Media-Common Branch Teacher working collaboratively to promote writing and math through art, and infusing technology as a tool. Students' progress will be assessed through writing pieces, ELA and Math Project Based Assessments, rubrics and teacher made tests. There will be materials purchased to support the implementation of the program. We will purchase the NY Ready Writing program, which is designed to provide explicit instruction with a focus on writing about reading in content area themes. The NY Ready Writing program covers Reading Informational Text and Literature Standards, as well as, the Writing and Language Standards. These materials will be specifically used with the students participating in the ELL-Saturday Academy program. Four certified Bilingual and/or ENL teachers with a minimum of three years experience, 1 Common Branch-Media teacher, and 1 Common Branch-Art teacher will provide instruction. The Common Branch-Art teacher will rotate amongst the four groups; one hour per group, per week. This will ensure all four groups to have equal opportunity to synthesize math word problems via art. Similarly, the Common Branch-Media teacher will also push into each of the four groups, one hour per group, per week. The role of the Media teacher is to support the students in practicing and implementing research-based writing. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Due to budgetary reasons, The Title III LEP Supplemental Program will be the only Saturday program running in the school. Therefore, Title III funds will be used to pay for one Assistant Principal to supervise the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Research indicates that Professional Development (PD) is the key to improve student achievement. The Assistant Principal along with the ELA and Math Coach will offer a comprehensive Professional Development (PD) program to support the 6 teachers participating in the Title III Supplemental Saturday Program, as well as the Bilingual and ENL teachers in our school. The PD program will address the needs of our new and experienced staff in order to align best teaching practices for ELLs with research based findings on language acquisition. Every 3rd Saturday from November through February, there will be a two hour PD/ Planning from 9:00 to 11:00am. The topics will include: Unpacking the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS); Learning Targets aligned to the CCLS; Creating Rigorous Tasks for ELLs; and Scaffolded Questions to Promote Discussion. Experienced teachers will be assessed for their strength and weaknesses based on observations, questionnaires, classroom Learning Walks and supervisory input. During these professional development sessions, the use of pedagogical second language acquisition strategies and techniques such as scaffolding language and meta-cognition processes, will be emphasized. Teaching strategies will also include activities and techniques to develop oral language and vocabulary, as well as reading and writing skills. Best practices in second language instruction will be modeled, analyzed and implemented in the classroom setting. In addition, non-ENL/Bilingual certified teachers will have the opportunity to attend workshop sessions offered by the Department of ELLS to enhance their pedagogical skills. Title III funds will be utilized to cover the cost for per-diem to facilitate coverage of teachers attending these workshops. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: The Assistant Principal will provide 4, one hour session, parent workshops that address the academic, social and emotional needs of the ELL students. All parents of ELL students will be invited and encouraged to attend these workshops. The parent workshop topics are aligned with the Title III program. These workshops will focus on developing academic language at home, building prior knowledge and vocabulary through family trips, developing reading and writing at home, activities to increase the listening, speaking, reading and writing, and creating games to increase mathematical concepts and fluency. Parents will also be informed of the instructional program that the students receive in the bilingual class, as well as, recommended practices that parents can use to assist their child in his or her academic growth. During these workshops, refreshments will be provided. Since 98% of our ELL parents are Spanish speakers, 25 parents of students participating in the Title III supplemental program will be invited to attend 2 cultural trips to El Repertorio Español to enhance their experiences. EL Repertorio Español, a DOE approved vendor, offers plays in Spanish that are relevant to the experience of Latinos, such as the challenges and misconceptions about the Spanish language, culture and traditions. We expect that these plays help reinforce cultural pride, and instill the love for the arts and theater. Also, in an effort to to include and support the remaining 2% of ELL parents who speak Arabic, there will be trips to NYC museums, including the Museum of Natural History and the MET. These trips will not only serve as resources to support language development, but also to strengthen family-school relationships. The cost of the trips will include an approximate amount of $2,000.00 for admission and transportation. Finally, the family trips will help increase vocabulary development and language acquisition which will improve student academic achievement. Through the use of flyers and letters, as well as via the school website, the parents will be informed of all Title III LEP activities, including trips, workshops end of program celebrations, etc.. These notifications will be provided in English and Spanish, as well as any other languages as necessary. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name The Audubon School Borough Manhattan School Number 128 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cary Pantaleon Coach S. Capella, Data Specialist ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teresa Santiago ENL Teacher/Subject Area Sara Kaczmarek ENL Teacher/Subject Area Heriberta Osoria, ELL Lead Related-Service Provider Solangel Pimentel Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Yvette Corporan Coach N/A School Counselor Lolita Bitanga Parent Luis RodriguezLucia Bravo Parent Coordinator Alexandra Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member Seleni Nazario Other (Name and Title) Alicia Betancourt, Gen. Ed. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 8 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 531 Total number of ELLs 153 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.81% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. 1 K 0 0 0 2 2 2 6 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 2 2 2 6 4 1 1 0 0 0 2 4 3 1 0 0 0 2 2 5 2 0 0 0 2 2 2 6 5 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 2 0 6 8 10 29 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments are used in order to gage the literacy skills and guide instructional planning for our ELLs: Fountas and Pinnell running records (in English and Spanish), Estrellita, writing publications in English and Spanish, CCLS aligned performance based tasks that occur throughout units of study, and the Envisions math program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data indicates that our ELL students in K and 1 are making strides in the development of phonemic awareness, fluency and decoding skills. However, they are still not meeting grade level expectations in the area of comprehension. Our ELLs in grades 2-5 are showing progress in reading and showing basic understanding of different literacy genres, however, they are still 2018-19 CEP 50  working towards insightful comprehension as well. Based on the information gathered from the data, we dedicate much time during CPLC planning hours to discuss students strengths and weaknesses in order to continue to monitor progress and decide the next best practices. During CPLC, intervention teachers plan together with classroom teachers to create comprehensive strategies that will enable students to continue to show growth. All teachers are continuously collecting data on students and during formal and informal teacher observations, learning walks, and inter-class visitations, administration uses this data to closely monitor teacher moves to ensure continued student progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The following summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments are used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need: end of unit tests, grade wide culminating performance based tasks, Strategies To Achieve Math Success intervention (STAMS), and Compass Voyager. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As mentioned above, during CPLC, intervention teachers plan together with classroom teachers to create comprehensive strategies that will enable students to continue to show growth. All teachers work together to ensure that differentiation and proper scaffolds are set to be implemented during instruction.Teacher instruction is then monitored by supervisors to assure that the proper mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency level in each program. Schedules are determined by the grade supervisors, program coordinator, and ENL teachers to service the target population and are altered on an as-needs-basis. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In addition to providing our ELLs with mandated ESL service, we include them in our RTI plan. In order to identify students for Tier 1, Tier 2 and/or Tier 3, the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment System (F & P), is used as the Universal Screener. The data is analyzed by the RTI Team to ensure that all students are properly serviced. Once students are screened, intervention is provided in five cycles. After each cycle, the team reviews student data to determine next steps on an individual basis. Students in Tier 1 are provided with strong core instruction; those in Tier 2 and Tier 3 are targeted for intense tailored instruction. The ELL cohort meets at least once per month for planning sessions. During these planning sessions, teachers design rigorous tasks that incorporate language development differentiated to meet the students' diverse needs. ELLs who are in the Tier 2 and Tier 3 are targeted for more intensive academic support. This support is provided by their classroom teacher, as well as other qualified staff to address their language and academic needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessment data is used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs: NYSESLAT, RLAT, state-wide English Language Arts exam, Fountas & Pinnell in both English and Spanish, The Home Language Arts Performance Assessment as well as the Math ,and Science state-wide test , and the ELL Data Analysis Tool. We also use the EDAT information and filtering capabilities to help gather additional information on our Ell students to ensure we are meeting all their academic needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on the data gathered from the NYSELAT, the weakest areas in the grades K, 1 and 2 appear to be in the Reading and Writing strands. In grades 3, 4 and 5, due to their scores both on the ELA state exam and the scores on the NYSELAT, some of the ELLs test out of the program. Those remaining are mainly at the expanding level of English proficiency who lack skills to master the writing strand. Due to this lack of mastery in this modality, this group requires more intensive support in writing. Intensive ENL instruction provided in the form of both pull out small group class and push-in intervention support during ELA in the content areas will be provided to all students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels of English proficiency. Lower student/teacher ratio for ENL instruction in grades K-5 will facilitate more interaction and a greater opportunity for diagnostic prescriptive instruction. Small group instruction as well as flexible grouping, cooperative 2018-19 CEP 51  learning strategies and techniques will help address individual needs. Reading and writing in the areas of math, science and social studies will augment the students’ opportunity to develop vocabulary and concepts in the academic areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Free-Standing ENL program instruction is provided in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. The ENL teacher uses Integrated and Stand-alone ENL instruction to build English language skills. Students are grouped by grade with mixed proficiency levels. ENL mandated minutes are provided based on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL proficiency levels. All pedagogical staff are trained with ELL strategies, including using visuals, Total Physical Response (TPR), infusing language objectives in all lessons, and scaffolding instruction to support language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. In the Transitional Bilingual program, the language of instruction for each content area is customized based on the students' language proficiency level according to the NYSESLAT. Students who scored at the Entering (Beginning) and Emerging (Low intermediate) level receive literacy, math, and science instruction in Spanish, while social studies is taught in English using ESL methodology. Moreover, students at the Transitioning (Intermediate) and Expanding (Advanced) level receive literacy and social studies instruction in English using ESL methodology whereas, Math and Science is taught in Spanish to support Native language development. c. DL program. If applicable. In the Dual language program, we follow a 50/50 model with alternating days . Our dual language program consists of two classes per grade. In grades Pre-k to 2, the classrooms are side by side with both languages taught on alternating days by two alternating teachers. In grades 3and 4 the Dual Language classes are self-contained, with a Bilingual Certified teacher, teaching both languages on alternating days. In grades 3 and 4, the Bilingual certified teacher is responsible for the English and Spanish instruction the class. The students learn the two languages simultaneously where the language of instruction is alternated daily. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided, the ENL teacher schedules are determined and created based on students' NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The ELL Supervisor monitors that each ELL student receives the mandated minutes of ENL instruction. In addition, the classroom teachers are provided with student lists indicating the required ENL minutes along with a schedule of services. The schedule includes the time and frequency of services. Due to the collaborative nature of our school, our classroom teachers and service providers work together to make sure that all students receive the mandated services.The two certified ENL teachers will use the stand-alone and integrated model of ENL instruction to service ELLs in mainstream classes in accordance to their language proficiency and the required units of support. In the integrated model the ENL teachers provide the services co-teaching and co-planning with the mainstream teacher where the lesson is scaffold to develop language proficiency. In the stand-alone model, the ENL teachers provide ENL services to students that are based on NYSESLAT levels and by grade regardless of class and travel together to an ENL classroom. Entering (Beginning) and Emerging 2018-19 CEP 52  (Low intermediate) level students will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and Transitioning (Intermediate), Expanding (Advanced) level students will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week. Explicit ENL instruction is facilitated through content area teaching. Professional development is provided to enhance the teachers’ best practices in second language acquisition methodology including scaffolding instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content instruction in all settings are aligned to the CCLS. Language of instruction in the TBE programs is customized as indicated in the Part 154 Regulations. Specifically, TBE classes provide math and science in Spanish, while teaching social studies and literacy in English. However, newcomers receive literacy instruction in Spanish. All students in the Dual Language Academy receive all content subjects in both English and in Spanish, since it is an alternating model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language; they are assessed with Estrellita Benchmark assessments, , Fountas and Pinnell in Spanish, Formative and Summative assessments in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As part of the registration process, SIFE students are identified based on the Home Language Survey, an interview to determine prior schooling experiences, and an informal assessment. Due to age differences and NYCDOE restrictions, students are placed in the age/grade appropriate class. Therefore all SIFE students begin in a bilingual beginning level class. However, within the daily schedule, instruction is modified based on the level of proficiency in their native language. Research based instruction is provided in the five dimensions of reading: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency and comprehension, as per the National Reading Panel. SIFE students are immediately provided with intervention services according to their needs; this may include streaming with other classes. SIFE students are also targeted for our intervention programs and small group tutoring during and after school. Support staff will use different materials and programs including Estrellita, Wilson, Words Their Way, Voyager Passport and HB Intervention and ELL Kit. In addition, ongoing assessments are used to monitor and adapt instruction and assess learning. As indicated above, all new students are screened as part of the registration process. We also refer to the NYSESLAT test results in order to effectively place new students into the appropriate class. Most newcomers are placed in the TBE classes, receiving 75% of their instruction in Spanish and 25 % in English. As in all our classes, teachers utilize available data as well informal assessments to plan diagnostic prescriptive instruction. They modify activities specifically based on the student’s needs. Newcomers and all at risk students are our priority for intervention services. This includes providing additional reading instruction during the day, as well as after school tutoring programs. In addition, the computer based programs such as, Imagine Learning English, and Compass Learning Oddysey (CLO) are used to support all strands of English language development. Our Developing ELLs utilize, the Ready Gen, which is a Common Core Aligned curriculum to support literacy instruction. This is a thematic, developmental reading program that has a Spanish series paralleled to the English series. The literacy program consists of 90 minutes of balanced literacy. Through individual conferencing, mini lessons will be developed to target children’s specific learning and/or language needs. The Long Term ELLs are provided with additional support from our intervention staff. They are given priority for participation in before/after school programs. Teachers use high quality instruction that is differentiated by students' academic and 2018-19 CEP 53  language needs. Also, class trips are arranged to build background knowledge as well as academic language. The Former ELLs are provided with testing accommodations during most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and state mandated. In addition, our Former ELLs receive a minimum of 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week in a mixed proficiency level group where they provide peer tutoring to develop questioning skills, paraphrasing, and summarizing skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL Students With Disability (SWD) receive the same curriculum materials as all our mainstream students. They are instructed with grade-level materials using scaffolds strategies for language development and content knowledge. ELLs with special needs are serviced in accordance with the determination and specifications of their IEPs. We have on staff bilingual SETSS teachers, bilingual counselors, and bilingual speech providers. These services are provided within the school day as pull-out/push-in models. As part of our daily ELA instruction we have implemented a “Reading Is Enlightening” (RIE) literacy period. During this literacy period, AIS teachers push-in to provide support to students with special needs using a variety of materials such as, Wilson, Estrellita, Words Their Way, Voyager Passport, and other Intervention Kits. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have implemented flexible programming for our ELL-SWD students in order to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. We also maximize instructional opportunity through flexible small group instruction, cooperative learning, various strategies like scaffolding language, TPR “Total Physical Response.” We also aim to support the 8 multiple intelligences (Howard Gardener) as well as to increase the number of books in a variety of genres. An emphasis is placed on an integrated content area curriculum instruction to allow more opportunities for practice in the application of language and learning experiences. Also, ELL-SWD students participate in the Good Dog Foundation to help promote language development and self-esteem. At PS 128M, we believe in incorporating all students in the general framework of the school. As such, we have integrated a flexible schedule within the ELL-SWD program to ensure the social, emotional and intellectual needs of students are met. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWD students are integrated in all school-wide activities; including monthly writing celebrations, assemblies, science and social studies fairs where they are paired with general education classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school intervention programs for ELLs in ELA is integrated with Social Studies and Science instruction. Also, ELA and Math has been designed to incorporate supplemental instruction during the day as well as outside of the daily schedule. Classroom teachers and intervention staff provide diagnostic prescriptive instruction opportunities to meet the areas of deficiency in the four language strands: reading, writing, listening and speaking. Our ELLs are included in our Intervention Plan to address their academic needs based on data analysis. The targeted intervention programs used for ELLs include: Journeys and Senderos, Voyager Passport, Words their Way, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, Wilson, Leap Frog, Imagine Learning English and STAMS- Strategies To Achieve Math Success for ELA and Math support. Math intervention is also provided using weekly math challenges, fluecy bees, daily guided math instruction, as well as integrating math language objectives in daily lessons. In addition, our intervention program includes native language support/development. We use different resources such as ESTRELLITA and Pasaporte to support our Spanish speaking students. Our SIFE students are provided with academic intervention services during the day. The SIFE intervention program consists of an intensive phonics and math 2018-19 CEP 54  program that utilizes an interactive, multi-sensory approach by incorporating visual cues, chanting, kinesthetic activities through games and group activities in Spanish. In addition, a CBO off-site after school program, FYI Welcome Program, supports newly arrived ELL students get acclimated to their new environment. We give priority to our ELL student to take part on any intervention programs we offer during and/or after school hours. To ensure ELLs participation in these programs, we send home invitation letters to the parents and phone calls are made to recruit ELL students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue with all our current programs and services since they have shown to be effective for our ELL students. For Intervention we will also be using Teacher Created Materials Curriculum which is also Common core Aligned. In 2019-2020 we will be expanding the Dual Language program to the fifth grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Third grade transitioned to Dual Language in 2017-2018. Fourth grade will change from TBE to Dual Language in 2018-2019. Fifth grade is projected to change from TBE to Dual language in 2019-2020. We are reducing our TBE classes at the same time as we are expanding our Dual Language program to better meet the needs of our students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are provided with equal access to all curricular and extracurricular programs. In an effort to improve our ELL students' skills in reading and writing, ELL students participate in RTI interventions provided by the ESL teachers as part of their daily instruction. Also, we offer intervention programs during the day that focus on diagnostic prescriptive instruction, and flexible grouping for differentiated instruction. ELLs in grades 2-5 participate in the ELL after school program. This program provides instruction to foster English language development . This 2-5 tutorial program provides staff an opportunity to meet individual student needs on a "one-to-one" basis or small group setting through a diagnostic prescriptive approach. In addition, a CBO off-site after school program, FYI Welcome Program, supports newly arrived ELL students get acclimated to their new environment. We give priority to our ELL student to take part on any intervention programs we offer during and/or after school hours. To ensure ELLs participation in these programs, we send home invitation letters to the parents and phone calls are made to recruit ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are provided equal access to all materials. Hence, all curriculum components and content areas are in both English and Spanish. Programs include, Starfall, BrainPop, PBSKids.org. Multiplier.com, Learning A-Z, Scratch Animation Programming, GooglecsFirst coding and programming, Robotics programming utilizing EV3 Mindstorm software,Indy Kids Newspaper - Kids Journalism Workshops and Maker Faire Science and Tecnology Fair and Flight and Safety International Flight Simulator Program. We also use Imagine Learning technology based program to supplement language development for ELLs, as well the use of computers, smarts boards, and labtops to facilitate research, aid comprehension, and to present their work. ELLs are also provided with bilingual text books and resources to enhance and excellerate their learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the DL program, home language support is delivered through all content areas as and alternating 50/50 model. However, in the TBE program, home language support is delivered through the content areas, such as literacy, mathematics and science. Finally, in the ENL program home language support is offered though projects. All TBE classrooms have Spanish and English libraries, as well as word walls to support both languages. In addition, all ELL students are provided with glossaries and lots of visual support to enhance language development in all languages necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELL students are provided with age-grade level materials and resources. Teachers are trained to scaffold instruction and differentiate activities to meet the students' needs. 2018-19 CEP 55  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Resources are shared whenever necessary. All materials are equally accessible to all students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELL students that are newly enrolled in our school are provided with a packet of activities to complete before the beginning of the school year. In addition, we encourage newly enrolled ELLs to participate in the Welcome Program from Fresh Youth Initiatives throughout the school year. The Welcome Program offers students who have recently arrived to the USA activities to get them acclimated to the culture by visiting museums, parks, theaters, etc. In addition to the above programs, we also provide additional programs for the ELLs. In addition to our parent involvement, we also provide programs for our ELL students that enhance their social, emotional and cognitive development. These programs include Ballroom Dancing, which is a dance program that enables students to make social, cultural, and historical connections through dance. We also have an after school Instrumental Music Program that exposes students to fun ways of learning different instruments. Our Shakespeare Society program introduces Shakespeare as an accessible manner that engages the creativity of our students and builds upon reading skills, writing skills and public speaking. We also have the Robotics EV3 software program in Partnership with the Da Vinci Engineering School for Youth that engages students in engineering and computer science through the Robotics program that deal with design, construction, operation, and application of robots, as well as computer systems for their control, sensory feedback, and information processing. Through The Indy Kids Newspaper our ELL’s do web research on current events, then they write and publish articles. In addition, our Dual Language Pre-K program was highlighted by the Early Childhood Education Department for providing meaningful and purposeful centers that foster critical thinking and language. We also have a Math Fluency Bee and a Spelling Bee that showcases our students’ ability to spell and do computations in under 5 seconds! 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our dual language program consists of two classes per grade. In grades Pre-k to 2, the classrooms are side by side with alternating days and two alternating teachers. Grade 3-4 are self-contained, with a Bilingual Certified teacher teaching both languages on alternating days. Each class is composed of 50% EP students and 50% of ELLs. All content areas are taught in both languages with alternating days. The Pre-k to 2, classrooms are side by side classrooms; one with a Common Branch licensed teacher and the other with a Bilingual Certified teacher. The language is separated by classroom; the Spanish room has all displays/visuals in Spanish and the English room in English. Each class travels to the room of the language of instruction for that day. The 3rd and 4th grade classes use a self contained model with alternating days. In both the Pre-k to 2, and the 3rd to 4th grade classes, the students learn the two languages simultaneously where the language of instruction is alternated daily. The Common Branch teacher is responsible for the English instruction of both classes and the Bilingual teacher is responsible for the 2018-19 CEP 56  Spanish instruction of the two groups in grade K-1. The Bilingual certified teacher in grades 3 and 4 is responsible for both the English and Spanish instruction. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the school year we will provide five two hour sessions devoted to best practices in teaching the ELL student to all staff members, including newly appointed appointed teachers in order to support them . Staff will also share ENL methodologies during faculty conferences, teacher team and monthly grade meetings. The Literacy/ELL Coach, the Math Coach and the Bilingual/ELL Administrator will support peer coaching sessions, after school workshops, and planning sessions. All newly appointed teachers will be provided with a mentor to assist them in planning, in the delivery of instruction and the interpretation of assessment data. Inter-visitations will be arranged to support teachers’ needs. Teachers of ELLs are also part of of teacher teams. They meet every week; first week of the month is to analyze data; the second and third week of the month is to plan collaboratively around their curriculum maps, and the last week of the month is for professional development differentiated by cohort. The professional development for the ELL Cohort is under the topics of; infusing the language common core learning standards, creating rigorous tasks for ELLs, creating a multicultural ecology; ENL strategies in daily instruction; vocabulary development, differentiation for ELLs based on language acquisition levels and using multiple intelligence and Depth of Knowledge (DOK) in planning. Also, our Dual language teachers and the ELL Coach participate in a series of PD offered by the DOE office of ELLs. Our CPLC Tuesday Parental Engagement & Year at a Glance for the 2017-2018 school year is as follows for our teachers of ELL’S. September February 9-13-18 Parent Engagement 2-05-19 9-20-18 Scoring Math Placement 2-11-19 9-26-18 Parent Engagement 2-18-19 School Closed October 2-25-19 Star/Data Report Card Entry 10-1-18 F & P Norming March 10-08-18 4-11-19 Spring Newsletter(March to June) 10-15-18 Math Quizzes/Parent Engagement 4-18-19 Parent Engagement: Planning for PTC 10-22-18 2018-19 CEP 57  HLA Norming and Scoring 3-25-19 Testing Meeting –Gr. 3-5 ELA & Math PreK-2- Parent Engagement 10-29-18 Promotional Criteria Policy for SWD 4-01-19 Parent Engagement/Portfolio Review November April 11-6-18 Chancellor PD Day 4-08-19 Parent Communication/Planning 11-12-18 Topic: 4-15-19 Parent Engagement/Scoring 11-19-18 Advance Literacy for ELLs & 5 Hallmarks 4-19-19 School Closed 11-26-18 Pre-K Teaching Gold PD – Effective Feedback 4-25-19 Parent Engagement/ Prep for F&P December May 12-3-18 5-1-19 Parent Communication/Planning 12-10-18 5-8-19 Parent Engagement/Scoring 12-17-18 Gr. 3-5 Scoring Ready NY Writing Book 2 & 3 Gr. PreK-2- Parent Engagement Lead Teachers Vertical Team 5-15-19 12-24-18 School Closed 5-22-19 January 5-29-19 Portfolio Review 1-7-19 Progress Reports June 1-14-19 Parent Communication/Planning 2018-19 CEP 58  6-11-19 Clerical 1-21-19 Parent Communication/Planning 6-11-19 Star/Data Report Card Entry 1-28-19 Scoring Math MOY Envision 6-13-19 Parent Communication/Planning 2-4-19 Vertical Teams Pre-K: Student Engagement and Differentiation SPED: Differentiation: Using IEP Goals/Gardner’s Intelligence ELL/DLA: Differentiation based on Language Proficiency LEADS: Differentiation through Project Based Learning/STEM Paraprofessionals: Behavior Intervention Strategies 6-26-19 Reflection on Parent Engagement 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In an effort to support all teachers in meeting the required professional development hours, 15% of the PD provided by the school is dedicated to language acquisition and best practices for integrating content and language instruction. In addition, we customize our PD plan so that all bilingual and ENL teachers will have 50% of their PD dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction and best practices. Bilingual, ENL and mainstream teachers are provided with opportunities to research, learn and implement second language development strategies that support ENL instruction in content area. All teachers are advised and encouraged to maintain records of all agendas and handouts provided in these workshops to serve as evidence of their participation. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As part of registration all parents have a one to one meeting where program choice is offered and explained. Choices are as followed: E=ENL/ESL, B=TBE, D=Dual Language. Parents of ELLs are also provided with individual meetings in addition to Parent Teacher Conferences, and Quarterly Progress meetings to discuss the child's language development and goals. These individual meetings are scheduled during the Parent Engagement time in accordance to the bargaining agreements. Attendance is recorded and filed. In addition, the ELL Coach provides parent workshops that address the academic, social and emotional needs of the ELL students. These workshops focus on; Developing Academic Language at Home, Building Prior Knowledge and Vocabulary through Family Trips, Developing Reading and Writing at Home, Activities to Increase the Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing, and Creating Games to Increase Phonemic Awareness and Phonic skills. Parents will also be informed of the instructional program that the students receive in the bilingual class, as well as, recommended practices that parents can use to assist their child in his or her academic growth. These workshops are facilitated in both English and Spanish. Through 2018-19 CEP 59  the use of flyers and letters, as well as via the school website, the parents will be informed of meetings, test schedules and special projects that are taking place in the bilingual classroom. Regulations and laws that impact the ELL students and their family will also be addressed by the ELL Supervisor during meetings and special workshops. During these workshops, the Parent Coordinator provides simultaneous translation in Spanish. In addition, all handouts and notifications are sent English, as well as in their preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator, Ms. Sanchez works closely with the Parent Association and all parents to provide translation, guidance and support. As a result of a parent survey, we are offer ENL and Technology courses in which our ELL parents participate. Also, our parents are involved in the Arts and Crafts classes offered throughout the year. ESL classes are also provided utilizing the WAN-We Are New York- Program in conjunction with The Mayor's Office Initiatives Program. In addition, ELL parents' involvement is evident is during our monthly cultural assemblies, during class project celebrations, trips, as well as during workshops. In addition, many ELL parents are volunteers in our school. They assist with morning line up, dismissal, escorting students who come late, and assisting teachers in the classrooms. All workshops are offered during morning and evenings to promote parent participation. Simultaneous translation in Spanish is provided during all events and all handouts and notifications are sent English, as well as in their preferred language. Our school also participates in “The Read Across America Day!” It is a special day of honoring Dr. Seuss in which parents read inside the classroom. We have the Give a Kid a Smile program that visits our school to teach students about dental care. Additionally, our ELL parents’ also participate in Parent Workshops that include: Common Core Standards, Discipline, SPED Reform, Health and Nutrition, as well as classes in Culinary Arts, Computers, Arts and Crafts, and ESL. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. In addition to our parent involvement, we also provide programs for our ELL students that enhance their social, emotional and cognitive development. These programs include Ballroom Dancing, which is a dance program that enables students to make social, cultural, and historical connections through dance. We also work with a Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) dance program which helps students stay off drugs. We even have an after school Instrumental Music Program that exposes students to fun ways of learning different instruments. Our Shakespeare Society program introduces Shakespeare as an accessible manner that engages the creativity of our students and builds upon reading skills, writing skills and public speaking. Our students put on a spectacular presentation of excerpts from Macbeth and A Midsummer Nights Dream in the school auditorium. We have the Robotics EV3 software program in Partnership with the Da Vinci Engineering School for Youth that engages students in engineering and computer science through the Robotics program that deal with design, construction, operation, and application of robots, as well as computer systems for their control, sensory feedback, and information processing. Our students did such a great job in Robotics that they won third place in the NYC First Official Qualifying Tournament. Through The Indy Kids Newspaper our ELL’s do web research on current events, then they write and publish articles. In addition, our Dual Language Pre-K program was highlighted by the Early Childhood Education Department for providing meaningful and purposeful centers that foster critical thinking and language. We also have a Math Fluency Bee and a Spelling Bee that showcases our students’ ability to spell and do computations in under 5 seconds! 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cary Pantaleon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 128M-The Audubon School School DBN: 06M128 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cary Pantaleon Title Principal Yvette Corporan Assistant Principal Alexandra Sanchez Parent Coordinator Teresa Santiago ENL/Bilingual Teacher Luis Rodriguez Parent Sara Kaczmarek Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Navarro Teacher/Subject Area N/A Stacey Capella Coach Coach Lolita Bitanga School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Seleni Nazario Alicia Betancourt Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other General Education Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 6/4/18 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M128 School Name: the Audubon School Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alexandra Sanchez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The first source of information pertaining to the parents’ language needs and preference is obtained during registration with the completion and review of the Home Language Survey. Also, as part of the registration process, parents are asked their preferred language of communication. Our parents’ needs are also assessed during the first Parent Open Night held in September. Similarly, we obtain further information and/or clarification regarding language needs or preferences through ongoing meetings, such as Parent Teacher Conferences, parent workshops, and/or meetings held by our Parent Coordinator. In addition, surveys are distributed to parents, which are sectioned into topics related to the language, academic, physical, and mental health development of the family so that needs and interests of individual families may be identified. We also gather data via ATS reports, Blue Cards, and Parent Surveys. Finally, the parents’ needs are ascertained during face to face meetings and/or contact with school personnel. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Adangme Chinese Any French English Student does not speak Pilipino(A.K.A. Tagalog) Spanish Soninke 0 1 1 318 1 1 340 1 0 0.15 0.15 47.96 0.15 0.15 51.28 0.15 1 1 1 316 0 1 342 1 0.15 0.15 0.15 47.66 0 0.15 51.58 .15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent Handbook September Attendance Policy September Safety Procedures September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are translated by the parent coordinator or other designated staff in August prior to the beginning of school to ensure parents receive documents in a timely manner. Documents are translated by the parent coordinator or other designated staff in August prior to the beginning of school to ensure parents receive documents in a timely manner. Documents are translated by the parent coordinator or other designated staff in August prior to the beginning of school to ensure parents 2018-19 CEP 64  Uniform Policy September Parent Letters/ Parent Handouts and Brochures September- June receive documents in a timely manner. Documents are translated by the parent coordinator or other designated staff in August prior to the beginning of school to ensure parents receive documents in a timely manner. Documents are translated by the parent coordinator or other designated staff continuously throughout the school year to ensure parents receive all documents in a timely manner. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences November- March Curriculum Night September- May Individual Parent Meetings September- June Guidance Counselor Meetings September- June interpretation service(s)? Whenever possible available staff is assigned to help with translations. If no staff member is available in the necessary language outside personnel might be hired to help with translations such as www. languageline.com. Whenever possible available staff is assigned to help with translations. If no staff member is available in the necessary language outside personnel might be hired to help with translations www. languageline.com. Whenever possible available staff is assigned to help with translations. If no staff member is available in the necessary language outside personnel might be hired to help with translations www. languageline.com. Whenever possible available staff is assigned to help with translations. If no staff member is available in the necessary language outside personnel might be hired to help with translations www. languageline.com. 2018-19 CEP 65  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, limited- English proficient families will be contacted by , telephone calls, handout, and/or email in the necessary language by using a human translator, or computerized program such as www. languageline.com. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year, in accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during the chancellors professional development day all school staff is provided with resources( eg. Staff Handbook, translation websites) and is informed that school documents must be translated in order to meet the needs of the community. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Information regarding the parents’ rights to receive translated documents and/or translations during meetings is prominently posted in the school’s Main Office, Parent Coordinator’s Office as well as by the Main Entrance. This is also discussed during general parent meetings. As already indicated, however, no documents are sent home and no meeting is held without proper language translations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be provided in all languages necessary. Survey information will be gathered from the Department of Education website when available. School exclusive surveys will also be translated and data will be gathered to ensure that limited- English- proficient parents are receiving improved language services. Translation quality and consistency is monitored in several ways. All translated documents are read by more than one school staff member to ensure accuracy, quality and cultural sensitivity. Similarly, observations are made during all meetings. That is, if one person is translating, then another staff member is available to add, clarify and/or assist, again, to ensure proper translations. 2018-19 CEP 66 
