2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M132 School Name: P.S. 132 JUAN PABLO DUARTE Principal: JESSICA TORRES-MAHEIA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Juan Pablo Duarte School 06M132 310600010132 K-5 185 Wadsworth Ave. (212)927-7857 School Number (DBN): (212)568-8163 Phone Number: Jessica Torres-Maheia Fax: Email Address: jtorres12@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Urban Arts Partnership Jessica Torres-Maheia Domingo Estevez Luis Guerrero ReinaMarte HerminiaCordova N/A District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway Ave., New York, N.Y. 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917) 521-3757 Phone Number: (917) 521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave., 8 th Fl., New York, N.Y. 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646)470-0721 Phone Number: (917)339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT √ √ √ √ √ Name Position and Constituent Group Jessica Torres-Maheia Luis Guerrero ReinaMarte HerminiaCordova Domingo Estevez Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Fidelina Lozano Claribel Santos Pablo Marte Joanna Estades √ √ √ √ √ x Staff Staff Parent Parent Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Contextual Information: The Juan Pablo Duarte School is located in the heart of the vibrant community of Washington Heights in historic Upper Manhattan. It is a rich blend of cultures; long established residents welcome newly-arrived immigrants from many lands with most coming from the Dominican Republic with an increasing number of immigrants coming from Mexico and other Central and South American countries. The neighborhood hosts businesses large and small and world class universities, and medical centers such as New York Presbyterian. Our school enjoys family and community wide support. Our school serves nearly 300 students, primarily of Hispanic heritage, in grades kindergarten through 5th. 97% percent of our students are Hispanic, and 2% of our students are Black. 94% of our students are eligible for free lunch. 50% of our students are English Language Learners. Of this 50% are English Language Learners who also have IEPs. Twenty three percent of our students are students with disabilities It provides an education that not only addresses the academic needs of our students but also the social emotional components that come with adapting to a new country, a new culture and a very different learning environment. We provide an education that allows the students, through the use our own modified curriculum to develop their literacy and mathematical skills. Mission Statement: P. S. 132 is a place where diversity and cultural pride is encouraged and supported. Children want to come to school every day because of the support and nurturing they receive, the welcoming environment they encounter and the fun they have as they are engaged in rigorous learning activities. All students at P.S. 132 receive individualized small group instruction daily in literacy and mathematics. Science, social studies, art, physical education and music are purposeful and relevant to the thematic units across grade levels. We work closely with families and the community to provide a truly holistic approach to education. Vision: At P. S. 132, our children will receive a top-notch education focused on rigorous individualized academics in English and Spanish to support our Dual Language Learners, enrichment that includes STEAM and social development embedded throughout the day. We understand that families and the community have an abundance of knowledge to offer in regards to supporting our children's education. Students, staff, families and the community are welcomed, nurtured, respected and encouraged to participate in school functions and assist in the development of our students to support college and career readiness. School Beliefs: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  We believe that students learn best using the Gradual Release of Responsibility Model and small group instruction. These methods of teaching provide opportunities for students to receive scaffolded learning, through teaching practices that embed f explicit modeling and ongoing assessment. By providing immediate and timely feedback, both orally and in written language, teachers directly address conceptual misunderstandings displayed by students. The workshop model and small group instruction are practices that our school has adapted to provide students with the necessary support to ensure their growth. Independent Reading strengthen students' reading skills and encourage a love for reading. Research shows reading helps students achieve. It accelerates progress in student learning and empowers students to know they can think for themselves. Framework for Great Schools & Progress: One of our greatest areas of growth has been in teacher collaboration and capacity building within our school as evidenced by the establishment of teacher teams across all grade levels. In alignment with the Framework for Great Schools and the District 6 priority of continuing to develop leadership capacity by fostering professional learning communities, we will continue to provide professional development cycles, during Monday PD sessions, geared toward strengthening pedagogical practices and improved academic achievement for all students, including Students with Disabilities (SWD) and Emergent Bilingual (EB) students. In alignment with the district-wide priority of providing effective and timely feedback to teachers the implementation of Advance will continue with a focus on feedback that supports explicit teaching/modeling, student engagement, small group instruction and formative assessment in order to promote academic improvement among emergent bilinguals and students with disabilities. Our grade level teachers will continue to attend weekly common planning meetings in which they share ideas and agree on strategies to be shared thus providing consistency in planning, building capacity and increasing communication across the school. Information gathered at these meetings will be used to plan professional development sessions. Our school-wide focus for this school year is to build instructional and environmental consistency across grades and classrooms in all subject areas which include the footprints of teaching and small group instruction during each period. (This includes cluster teachers/content specialists as well.) Our ultimate goal is that our students master key academic skills, and demonstrate strong character as exhibited by: honesty, service to others, a superior work ethic and a strong vision for and belief in their future. Parent-School-Community Ties: It is important for parents to understand their child’s academic progress and to understand how to support this progress. School leadership, teachers and staff communicate frequently with parents and provide a forum for parents to communicate their concerns. Communication with parents is consistent, inclusive and culturally sensitive. Our community school approach, including our partnerships with Community Based Organizations, connects families to services and resources that support students’ safety, well-being, and learning. Parents have opportunities to volunteer and be involved in the daily activities of the school. Special Student population needs: The school currently has 110 English as a New Language Students (ENLs) and 27 Former ENLs. 19 students have tested out of the program. Of the 64 current ENL students who were administered the ELA test, 53% are at level one and 41% at level 2. the number of level 1 decreased by 18% raising the number of level 2 by 27%. Of the 78 ENL students who were administered the state math assessment, 56% are at a level one a decrease of 19% increasing the number of level 3s and 4s by 6%. The school currently has 59 students with IEPs receiving services via a 12-1-1, 12-1, ICT, SETTS and Related Services. Of the 31 students were administered the ELA state test, 65% are at level on and 29% at level 2. The number of SWD performing at level one decreased by 8%. the number of SDWs performing at level 3 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  increased from 0 to 6%. 32 SWD were administered the math state assessment resulting in 59% performing at a level one a decrease of 10% and increasing the number of level 3s and 4s by 8%. Our current intervention program for ENL students is Imagine Learning. Imagine Language & Literacy is a English language and literacy program. The program focuses on the five areas of literacy as well as essential domains of language. Imagine Language & Literacy automatically differentiates instruction for every ENL student, allowing students to accelerate or review as needed. Imagine Language & Literacy's adaptive, one-on-one, intensive instruction and scaffolded supports are designed to serve the different needs of struggling ENL readers. The real time data is accessed by teachers for additional intervention services during literacy and math instruction and during a separate Guided Reading period. Currently SWDs are participating with the rest of the student population in the i-Ready intervention program. i-Ready is an adaptive, diagnostic, formative assessment and intervention program that is aligned tothe Literacy and Mathematics Common Core Learning Standards, which adjusts to pinpoint where students are performing well and where they are struggling. Once the i-Ready (on-line) diagnostic is complete, i-Ready creates an individualized, accelerated learning pathway for each student to ensure they meet grade level standards. i-Ready also provides grade level predictors for how students will perform on the state ELA and Mathematics exams. The real time data is accessed by teachers for additional intervention services during literacy and math instruction and during a separate Guided Reading period. Special Programs/Initiatives: P.S. 132 enjoys collaborations with several community based organizations, including Urban Arts Partnership, Catholic Charities, Wellness in the Schools, New York Presbyterian Hospital and Yeshiva University. These agencies provide ongoing services to our school community and are a vital component of our academic and social emotional support programs. As a school, we recognize that families and other community members are a vital part of all students’ academic and social success. We encourage parent/school collaboration at all levels and offer numerous opportunities for family and school interactions by providing workshops, on-line tools such as Class DoJo, New Visions Student Data Sorter, workshops and parent volunteer programs. We have active parents that are highly involved in the schools’ decision-making process as evidenced by our School Leadership Team, active Parents’ Association, attendance at weekly workshops, and other school related activities. This year over 150 of our students participate in our after-school program. This provides opportunities for parents to have their child participate in extracurricular activities such as art, music, dance, chess, karate etc., without any added expenses. Students also receive additional support in understanding and completing their homework assignments. Expanded Learning Time: In alignment with the Renewal Office initiative and our District's 2018-19 priorities of providing additional learning opportunities to students and multiple opportunities for improvement, we are providing our students with expanded learning time during the school day, school week and school year. Students have opportunities to participate in activities that are geared towards reinforcing literacy and math skills , and advance their learning through the use of on-line programs such as Imagine Learning (for new arrivals and emergent ENL students) and i-Ready as well as giving additional opportunities for teachers to provide data based-small group instruction. Our current Community Based Organization, Catholic Charities, services over 150 students in grades K – 5 th . Through this program, students receive additional academic support as well as arts and crafts and other extracurricular activities. Students in grades 2-5 participate in Saturday Academy. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M132 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 305 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 53 53 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 28 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 85.9% % Reduced Lunch 50.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 96.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 24 94.3% 0.3% 23.9% 2.3% 0.0% 0.7% 4 0% 8.8 30.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? SOP:3.2,3.3 QR:1.1 Develop sharper systems of looking at curricula so that there are suitable adjustments and rigor embedded into lessons leading to student engagement and more rigorous instruction for all students including relevant subgroups . Schools Strengths:  In the most recent Quality Review (June 2018), PS 132M received a Proficient in Curriculum, Pedagogy and Assessment. Improving from a developing to a proficient rating in Pedagogy and Assessment.  The school met the 2016-17 Renewal Benchmark for Rigorous Instruction as evidenced by the school Quality Guide. The School Quality Guide report indicates an increase in score under for area of Rigorous Instruction, from 2.76 in 2016-17 to 3.27.  As per the 2018 ELA and Math NY State test: o All Students: 29.1% demonstrated proficiency in ELA and 30.3% in Math. Priority Needs  Based on the 2018 ELA and Math NY State test results, the school will focus on supporting ENL and SWD students across grades by providing appropriate interventions and scaffolds to ensure that students are accessing rigorous instruction through multiple entry points in ELA and Math. Subgroups Performance:  o 6.1% English Language Learners demonstrated proficiency in ELA and 11.5% in Math. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  o 6.5% Students with Disabilities demonstrated proficiency in ELA and 18.8% in Math.  While the overall rating in the Rigorous Instruction Rating increases in the School Quality Guide report, the NYC School Survey results show a decrease in the teacher's positive response in this element.  Ensure instruction is CCLS aligned in order for our students to receive a rigorous and meaningful curriculum and learning experience. Previous assessment data showed a need for students to focus on text based evidence in literacy and data in mathematics to support those ideas and use more advanced reading comprehension and math problem solving strategies. We need to strengthen the alignment of curriculum and assessments to the rigor of the Common Core Leaning Standards. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our schools' instructional focus for the 2018-19 school year is:  supporting students using the Gradual Release of Responsibility to develop student independence and sustainable practices.  differentiating instruction in the form of targeted small groups for all students.  consistently Checking for Understanding throughout each lesson and in all content areas using formative assessments to inform small group instruction.  having well thought out and rigorous lesson plans that allow for high-level of student engagement through  questioning and discussion during student tasks. implementing tiered intervention strategies to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Our vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms is the expectation that all teachers will use explicit teaching and small group instruction via the gradual release model. These are practices that our school has adapted to provide students with the necessary support to ensure their growth to move through the stages of highly supportive instruction to student autonomy. Guided and Independent Reading are vehicles being used to strengthen students' reading skills and build independence. In alignment with the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools, implementing practices that promote rigorous instruction, require an understanding of where students are, multiple strategies to modifying and adapting instruction while maintaining inclusiveness of all learners, and high standards-based expectations. To this end, we believe that skills and strategies must be modeled; instructions must be clear and explicit; more time must be devoted to student “doing”or practicing and engaged in strategic small group work. It is imperative teachers utilize strategies to engage all learners, regardless of their present level of performance, in accessible, meaningful, and appropriately rigorous academic work. We also focus significantly on the process of learning and use the data gathered, assessed, and analyzed throughout the process to identify actionable next steps and targeted small groups. Weekly common planning for literacy and math will provide consistent opportunities for teachers to share best practices, plan lessons and provide a venue for constant adult learning and reflection. This will ensure instructional curriculum consistency and consistency across classrooms. We will use model classrooms and peer collaborative teachers to encourage inter-visitation among colleagues to promote instructional initiatives. A professional development committee will be created to support school-wide needs. Staff will receive professional development in areas to support the gradual release of responsibility model and target small group instruction including analyzing data to group students appropriately   using data to plan instruction   lesson planning to include the gradual release model and small group tasks. guided reading as a small group strategy teaching methodology 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18    checking for understanding to make lesson adjustments and or determine scaffolds. student discourse during the mini lesson and small group work Literacy Instruction - implementing a balanced literacy approach with an emphasis on using the Gradual Release of Responsibility and small group instruction, incorporating independent reading and guided reading. The school has established leveled classroom libraries across genres, made writing a priority, and has launched cross-curricular writing units across the school. Teachers College Reading was launched in grades K-5 with modifications for our English Language Learners and Student with Disabilities by providing ENL students with strategies specifically to building language like the utilization of Imagine Learning and engaging students with special needs in activities that meet their specific goals (ie. breaks during a lesson, written or visual representation of their work instead of verbal). Math Instruction - Gradual Release is a model we've adopted as the core instructional practice across subject areas. As a school teachers are expected to explicitly teach a concept, allow students an opportunity to "have a go" on a dry-erase board using this as an opportunity for Checking-for-Understanding and using the data gathered for an immediate small group intervention while the remaining students work independently/collaboratively on an assigned task. Teachers and other adults in the room provide ENL students and SWD students with hands-on experiences using manipulatives to support concepts taught. ENL students and SWD students receive support through peer collaboration and trained paraprofessionals. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? We've adopted common core aligned curricula; Our school has adopted cross-curricular writing units across the school and will implement Math in Focus and Ready Math beginning in the 2018-19. Furthermore, in order to meet the personal, academic and cultural needs of our diverse learners, we continue to make modifications such as pacing, providing multiple entry points and scaffolds to ensure all students access to the curriculum. These modifications provide access to the content for our English language learners and SWD population as well as students who are struggling and those who may be challenged further. There will be an emphasis on vocabulary development and communication skills. Teacher teams will work collaboratively to choose 3 culturally relevant, grade level texts, students will read per school year. For example, in January students participate in an in-depth study of Juan Pablo Duarte. They engaged in research, reading, writing and presenting on the topic. Students engaged in art and music related to the topic as well. To support this effort, the school-wide schedule reflects intervention teacher pushing in for intervention. Guided reading groups across the school is based on students Guided Reading level. Every student knows their reading level and after their instructional level is paired to an independent reading level book to practice reading-for-pleasure and transfer skills/strategies taught. Students have book buddies in the lower grades and book clubs beginning in the 3rd grade. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Program offerings that allow students to discover and develop the talents and skills needed to become college and career ready will include a balance of fiction and non-fiction literature, citing texts and writing from sources; Working in teams and focusing on research skills. A second math class/session is now offered to all students in grades 3-5 designed to help students sharpen their problem solving skills and engage in multiple opportunities to master content that allows them to use math in situations that require mathematical knowledge. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  The incorporation of the instructional shifts is evident in our units of study and daily instruction. For example, in literacy, children are asked to relate to texts and use site evidence when writing and discussing. Vocabulary development in reading and writing is a major focus and our content units are directly connected to our literacy units. In math, students are engaged in minute math for speed and fluency, they are providing multiple strategies for solving real-world problems and content builds upon previous concepts across grade levels. In addition, students are asked to explain their thinking both verbally and in writing. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We envision instructional consistency across grades and classrooms in all subject areas which includes the footprints of explicit teaching and small group instruction during every period. The delivery of instruction should be planned following the structure of explicit teaching in which the teacher exercises a gradual release of responsibility that goes from "I do" to "we do" to you do". We also envision consistent teaching practices in Math from grades K-5 that include explicit teaching, small group work and on the spot assessments during every period. Teachers will engage in regular and consistent guided reading instruction in order to make gains in closing grade level literacy benchmark gaps. Daily lessons will incorporate regular conferencing in order to monitor and track students' progress. Strategy groups, guided reading groups, and additional interventions will be determined using the data gathered from daily instruction and formative assessment. Consistent assessment using the Fountas and Pinnell running records will guide this work. Pedagogy across classrooms will emphasize on the spot assessment, assessment-based differentiation, student “doing,” and student independence. During Expanded Learning Time (1 hour and 15 minutes per day), students will engage in social studies and science, targeted ELA and math support and enrichment using the i-Ready intervention program. Based on the profile groups from the diagnostic data, teachers will use resources from the Ready Teacher Toolbox to differentiate instruction for students performing above grade level. In addition, during the after school program(2 hours per day), students will receive music, drama, abacus training, reading tutoring, gardening, and sports instruction. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? We envision teachers using technology (ie: videos, photographs, etc.) to build background information along with differentiation of independent and collaborative tasks to provide access and ensure success for every student. For ENL students we will refer to their classification according to the NYSESLAT noting that instruction for students performing at the beginning levels looks different from those exiting. this will inform individualized instruction and student partnerships. In addition, the IEP goals will play a crutial part in modifying the curriculum to find students' entry points. Additional multiple entry points utilized to ensure success for all students are the following: Strategies and Interventions for English as a New Language Learners and Students with Disabilities:  Resources around the room such as support charts with question prompts Interest Inventories   Differentiated tasks  Graphic organizers   RADD to support tex based evidence  CUBE to support mathematical thinking Support charts with visual aids, conversation tools and habits What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  We believe that instruction must be driven by regularly collected data. Therefore, we will utilize the following assessments to measure student growth, monitor instructional success, and both guide and revise unit and lesson plans. Our approach is to use assessment in both formative and summative forms in order to provide intervention within units as needed, help with planning throughout units, and assessing effectiveness of teaching and learning at the end of units. The rationale of using formative assessments is to be able to provide support necessary for students before they fall behind. Students are quizzed weekly in math to determine their needs. Interventions such as Saturday Academy for math or small group instruction for ELA are in place as a preventative measure before students fall behind. This data is also used during common planning to help identify trends between classes and highlight needs to be addressed in planning moving forward. Summative assessments are used to track teaching success and measure student learning across units. Math:  Math Beginning-of-Year, Middle-of-Year, and End-of-Year assessments (Math BOY, MOY, and EOY assessments) (September, January, June) in grades K - 5 Fact Fluency weekly assessments in grades 2-5 I-Ready diagnostic in Mathematics (September, January and May)    Ready Math Assessment three times a year ELA: F&P Running records Running Records – every 6 weeks in grades K – 5 I-Ready diagnostic for ELA (September, January and May)  Gates MacGinitie    Writing pre/post assessments for each unit  Ready ELA Assessment three times a year Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) i-Ready Diagnostic F&P Running records Benchmark 2-5 K-5 Ready Paper/Pencil Formative 3-5 Pre/post writing unit assessments Summative K-5 Identify skills levels to inform and target instruction in literacy and mathematics in order to determine instructional grouping To determine students' reading levels and areas of strength and weakness in order to plan lesson with entry points that meet the needs of students (e.g., fluency, comprehension) Establish baseline and measure growth in reading and mathematics and To determine students' mastery of CCLS and to plan tiered lesson that will ultimate result in student mastery Through progress monitoring, teachers will adjust units to differentiate the instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Gates MacGinitie Diagnostic K-2 Math BOY, MOY, and EOY assessments Diagnostic and Benchmark K - 5 Weekly math Quizzes Progress Monitoring 1-5 Part 3 – Annual Goal To understand students' mastery of letter sound correspondence, phonemic awareness, comprehension, and vocabulary in order to modify instructional plan that will inform individualized instruction as will as student partnerships. Through progress monitoring, teachers will adjust units to differentiate instruction. Identify unit mastery to inform and target instruction mathematics and identify students in need of Saturday intervention Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be at least a 10% decrease in the number of students in grades 4 and 5 scoring level 1 on the spring 2019 ELA and Math exam, compared to the number of students in grades 3 and 4 scoring level 1 in the June 2018. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Rigorous Instruction: Index above 3.30 Improved Student Outcomes: ELA Proficiency Rating to 2.35 Improved Student Outcomes: ELA/Math Performance Index : ELA 70 and Math 91 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Rigorous instruction 6 week cycles beginning 9/17/18 going to 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal.. Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Generation Ready /Math Solutions consultants How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher observation ratings in Advance/students data from unit tests and work. All K-5 Teachers Rigorous Instruction ELA/Math Performance Index 6 week cycles beginning 9/17/18 going to 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal.. Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Generation Ready /Math Solutions consultants Teacher observation ratings in Advance/students data from unit tests and work. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Coaches will engage teachers in weekly PD sessions around the gradual release model, explicit teaching, and small group instruction, guided reading and guided math instruction, with a focus on using student work and data to drive the planning of each component. Teachers will participate in individualized coaching cycles for literacy and math based on their specific needs. Coaching cycles will be led by in-house instructional coaches and Generation Ready and Math Solutions consultants. Teachers will analyze and monitor iReady data to track student progress and adjust instructional plans in order to provide small group instruction for students to help move them toward proficiency All 1-5 Teachers and student Rigorous Instruction ELA/Math Performance Index October 2018 February 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers June 2019 iReady data reports identifying students whose benchmark reading levels indicate that they are on track to make one or more year of growth. Modifications and improvements made to curriculum planning for Teachers will track and monitor student progress in literacy and math using all data sources to All K-5 Teachers and students Rigorous Instruction ELA/Math Performance Index 10/2018 ON-GOING TO 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  All teachers Rigorous Instruction Ongoing differentiate instruction and plan for small groups to meet all students' identified needs at grade level. Administration team will conduct observations and walkthroughs to provide immediate and actionable feedback aligned to the instructional focus MFSC PD Support for teachers ENL and SWD Rigorous Instruction Principal & Assistant Principal MFSC Instructional Support Leads differentiation of instruction Increase in the gradual release model and small group instruction as evidenced by Danielson Framework for Teaching Student progress in literacy and math Teacher progress in the implementation of Gradual Release and Small Group Instruction September 2018 through June 2019 In cycles on going September 2018 through June 2019 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents/families through a series of social and instructional gathering that will give families more access to the school by creating an environment where parents are empowered to ask questions and be active partcipants in their children's overall growing. September 2018-June 2019  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings,  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared,  Monthly PA meetings,   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days, assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  With the help of the school's CBO (Allianza), the shool will provide opportunities for parents that will encourage a home-school connections where parents are empowered to be part of their children academic and social life in the school community. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Literacy and math coach to provide professional development to all teachers  Differentiated PD Calendar for Teacher Teams   Genre specific and leveled libraries  Culturally relevant materials by grade  Math-in-Focus program materials and professional development K-5  Guided Reading Books  Manipulatives and math supplies for all classrooms  White boards for every classroom      Ready math curriculum materials for grades 3-5  ReadyNY paper/pencil assessment    Smartboard upkeep for every classroom Smartboard compatible laptops for teachers iPads for grades K-1 i-Ready Imagine Learning for new arrivals and Former ENLs Imagine Math IEP Liaison to support teachers with writing data driven IEP goals and to use data driven informed grouping and instruction  Parent Engagement activities  Per session for parent engagement workshops around rigorous instruction  TC Reading Kits  TC assessment kits     Textbooks, material and supplies for After school and Saturday Programs  F and P Leveled Reading Kits Furniture ie: classroom furniture conducive for collaborative grouping and small group instruction Family Welcome Center Materials School copy center to ensure distribution of school wide resources and materials to ensure multiple entry points as well as, school wide norms and protocols  2 Reading specialists (1 Bilingual certified)  Technology Teacher to support teachers with the integration of technology in literacy and math as well as support implementation of Renewal Intervention initiatives  Program teachers with 3 additional planning periods per week to build a culture of collaboration and data conscious community  Peer Collaborative Teachers  Per Session teachers, coaches, AP and Principal for Saturday and after school programs  Per Diem to release teachers for professional development  Generation Ready Consultant for literacy and Math  Math Solutions Consultant  Community School, DISTRICT 6, MFSC and ORS RESOURCES and Personnel  Crisis Paraprofessionals   Bilingual Guidance Counselor   12:1:1 para professionals SETSS Provider IEP Teacher 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, at least 5% of level 1 students in grades 3, 4 and 5 will demonstrate a Level 2 proficiency in ELA and Math as measured by the i-Ready Predicted Proficiency Report. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-Ready Diagnostic Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. X X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? SOP 5.2- The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. SOP 5.4- All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. Schools Strengths School leaders consistently communicate high expectations for instruction and the social emotional well being of everyone in the school community with an emphasis on how it relates to college and career readiness. The school developed a cycle of professional learning opportunities that develops adults understanding on how to address the student behavior through positive behavior modifications based on a rewards systems. The goal is for students to self-regulate and be able to reflect on their choices. Students will receive a certificate indicating their positive behavior for that day. This promotes a positive-home school connections and encourages families to have conversations around choices students make. We saw an increase in positive responses in the Supportive Environment section of the NYC School Survey in the following categories: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Attendance: End-of-year 2017-2018 4th and 5th grade attendance was above the 95 percentile. Priority Needs: We did not meet our Renewal Attendance Challenge Benchmark of 95.6% for the 2017-18 school year. We saw a decrease in positive responses in the Supportive Environment section of the NYC School Survey in the following category: Peer Support for academic Work (Supportive Environment) – 79% positive responses (NYC School Survey Report 2017-2018)    Safety – 87% positive responses (NYC School Survey Report 2016-2017) Social Emotional – 75% positive responses (NYC School Survey Report 2016-2017) Survey Report 2016-2017) The school believes in establishing and maintaining a strong collaborative culture that is inviting and safe for all students , teachers, staff and families. As we continue to bridge the lines of communication, amongst all stake holders, we will continue to ensure that are students, staff and families are in a welcoming environment where they feel safe and empowered to take academic and social risks. .Our goal is to continue to improve school culture and increase positivity and collaboration amongst parents, teachers and students through professional learning opportunities as well as hands on collaborative activities that build community. End of year 2017-2018 K attendance was 91.05 and 1st grade attendance was 93.45. The school will focus this year on 1st and 2nd grade who to date are trending below 90%. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? We want all stakeholders to describe our school as a community of learners where all individuals have the opportunity to learn and to grow in a safe and nurturing environment. When students come to school everyday and are engaged in purposeful lesson using the gradual release model and are provided targeted support via small group instruction, they will perform to the best of their ability. Urban Arts Partnership is our main community based organization. However, we will have linkage agreements with New York Presbyterian Hospital, Community Word Project, Promise Project and the Turn 2 Us Foundation. These organizations support our school by providing programs and activities that address the social and emotional needs of our students through counseling and other creative venues such as drama, visual arts and nutrition. Our social-emotional framework is through the Restorative Justice . We have the “Behavior Matrix” values of always do your best, be respectful, be responsible and take pride in your schoolwork . In addition to staff members reinforcing these values, we have one full-time and one part time social worker that support this framework. The social-emotional development of our students will be measured through the number of suspensions, referrals, attendance, and school environment surveys. We will review the data on an ongoing basis at attendance committee meetings and leadership team meetings to make necessary adjustments and outreach to parents. Our attendance goal for 2018-2019 is 97.0%. This year, we are currently at 96.02%. For the coming school year we are tracking our students' attendance through the New Visions Data Sorter. We will continue to reach out to parents so that we can increase our attendance rate and reach our attendance goal of 97.0%. Due to the high number of students 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  arriving late to school, we also need to address tardiness. One way that we plan to address tardiness among our students is to send monthly reports to parents informing them of their child's punctuality record and also provide reward incentives. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Urban Arts Partnership CBO Focus Urban Arts is the school's point CBO. The main focus of UAP work is to increase attendance. Also, to foster a holistic approach through parent engagement, instructional support, and support needs of students to achieve success through social emotional learning. UAP provides instructional intervention through the arts with selected grade. There is also a focus on the chronically absent students through the arts with a program named Artevention. Catholic Charities Provide extracurricular activities during after school and summer camp. Support families and students by providing additional academic support. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? We will offer services that include parent participation. We will also hold two community forums in which parental feedback is solicited in order to guide our decisions and hear directly from the parents and students concerning what they feel will strengthen our programs both during and after school. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase the school's overall attendance percentage from 94.6% to 97% as measured by the 2018-2019 ATS RYMA attendance report compared to the 2017-2018 ATS RYMA report. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Attendance Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Students' attendance will be tracked through the New Visions Data Sorter. We will continue to reach out to parents so that we can increase our attendance rate and reach our attendance goal of 97.0%. Chronically and severely chronic absent students will be identified and an individualized support plan will be generated. Student attendance data will be reviewed by the attendance committee. Instructional leadership team meetings will occur to make necessary adjustments and plans for outreach to parents. Monthly Attendance Celebrations Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All K-5 students and families Attendance 9/2018 through 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principal Supportive Environment Attendance Teacher Urban Arts Project Attendance Committee Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in students' attendance All K-5 students and families Attendance Ongoing 9/2018 through 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principal Increase in students' attendance Supportive Environment Attendance Committee Urban Arts Project All K-5 students and families Attendance Supportive Environment Attendance All K-5 students and families The school will send monthly reports to parents informing them of their child's punctuality record and also provide reward Ongoing 9/2018 through 6/2019 Ongoing 9/2018 through 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principal Increase in students' attendance Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Increase in students' attendance Supportive Environment Attendance Committee 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  incentives to address absences and tardiness among our students. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Urban Arts Project How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Community School Director along with the CBO team will play a large role in providing parental support in the areas of supportive environment; the importance of students being present in school, and student social emotional well being. Through parent workshops, participation in PA meetings, partnership with RAMAPO for Kids and daily outreach to parents, the CBO will engage families in activities and discussions that provides strategies that supports the students' social emotional and academic growth. These activities will be ongoing from September 2018 through June 2019. The administrative team along with the CBO director will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. One of the major gaols is to increase the involvement of families in the school community by helping them becoming empowered by asking questions. Families will have an opportunity to become decision makers through a newly established Parent Association. Some of the opportunities for families are as follows:  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings  Parent Surveys  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared  Monthly PA meetings   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Attendance Incentives Counselor School Psychologist Per-session for Teachers for parent workshops Principal Assistant principal Parent Coordinator 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  Social Workers Service Providers Attendance Teacher Community School DIrector CBO Partnerships School Aides RAMAPO for Kids Community Schools, DISTRICT 6, MFSC and ORS RESOURCES and Personnel Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the average monthly attendance will reach 97% for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, as measured by the February 2019 ATS RYMA report. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS RYMA report/ New Vision Sorter attendance data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? SOP: 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 QR Indicator: 1.2 Classroom instruction needs to include strategies that address the needs of all students by incorporating multiple entry points, higher-order questioning, opportunities for students to engage in discussion with each other, and the use of resources that contain high level text and content complexity . Schools Strengths The majority of teachers are engaged in structured professional collaborations that include peer coaching cycles. Distributive leadership is developing through the use of lead teachers. Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused. The instructional capacity of teachers is strengthening and resulting in improved teacher practice and progress toward goals for groups of students. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide report, the collaborative teachers framework element went up from 2.05% to 3.42% Priority Needs According to the 2018 Quality Review report, the school's area of focus is 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. "Professional collaborations and data-based planning strengthen teachers’ instructional capacity and lead to progress for groups of students. However, the inquiry-based team structure outside of common content planning meetings is not a practice for the vast majority of teachers." 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Teachers will collaborate and work with coaches and administration using an inquiry-based approach to revise units with an attention to increasing the rigor of lessons plans while taking into account the entry points of all students. this work will align to the school's instructional foci as follows:  supporting students using the Gradual Release of Responsibility to develop student independence and sustainable practices.  differentiating instruction in the form of targeted small groups for all students.  consistently Checking for Understanding throughout each lesson and in all content areas using formative assessments to guide instruction.  having well thought out and rigorous lesson plans that allow for high-level of student engagement through  questioning and discussion during student tasks. implementing tiered intervention strategies to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Collaboration among teachers has been a long held value at P.S. 132. Initially, we found time for colleagues to connect, to share thoughts, and provide support for one another. This year as part of the Renewal initiative, the focus on teacher teams has become intentional and our teams have become vital to the improvement of every aspect of instruction. P.S. 132 is organized to promote teacher collaboration and in turn teacher leadership. The weekly schedule includes time for common planning periods for literacy and math. They are given time to attend professional development sessions in their area of expertise (Literacy, Mathematics, Science or Social Studies) and turnkey their learning. Instructional Coaches and the administration ensure that teaching and learning are guided by the belief that all students can learn and students get smarter by working harder. They hold high expectations for themselves and students and plan for differentiation through small groups that meets students’ needs. Student work is gathered and analyzed throughout the year to monitor student progress and guide planning. Lessons are structured so that students interact with content and each other, questions prompt thinking and feedback is given to students. The gradual release model within workshop model is the vehicle for the delivery of explicit instruction and student performance is assisted in many ways: questions are designed to scaffold thinking and modifications in terms of time, material and degree of teacher support are based on observed student needs. The workshop model provides structure for explicit instruction and stamina is encouraged in reading, writing and math. The Teachers College Units in Writing are being implemented to create a coherent ELA curriculum and that coherence is a guiding principal for the creation of units and plans. We are working to make sure that student engagement is both a strategic process for learning and an accountability outcome unto itself. Teachers work on units and plans in teams. They are guided by the surfacing the gap protocol and the analysis of the linguistic demands of text as they design supports and entry points for all learners. The administration and teacher teams are examining ways to schedule enrichment activities. A combination of formative and summative assessments will guide instruction and planning. In grades four and five, the item skills analysis informs planning and in class grouping, as well as, determining our instructional foci. As a formative assessment, Fountas and Pinnell is used to assess students at regular intervals in reading. Students’ writing is evaluated using the learning progressions and rubrics from Teachers College. Progress in mathematics is evaluated via end of unit 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  assessments and a mid- year assessment. Learning is monitored in both mathematics and ELA through the analysis of student work by each teacher team. We will provide teachers with training and meaningful opportunities to work together to implement strategies that will improve student learning. These strategies will implicitly allow teachers to take ownership of how to best implement the common core standards in their classrooms and to explore the teaching and learning possibilities opened up by the new standards. But more importantly, they ensure that these standards are constantly re-engineered against the real needs of our students. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our School Instructional Cabinet and Instructional Leadership Team will continue to meet on a weekly basis to develop a focus for observation cycles, provide targeted feedback to teachers, discuss and design professional development plans that addresses the needs of teachers and support student learning. Teacher leaders and school administration collaborate to support teachers in strengthening their content and pedagogical knowledge so that it positively impacts student achievement. Two math instructional coaches and two ELA instructional coaches support the instructional vision of the school by facilitating weekly planning meeting with grade teams and individualized support in cycles determined by needs assessments. . Coaches and administration observe the impact of planning and provide teachers with immediate feedback. cycles are revisited with teacher and goals are reset. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher team leaders will facilitate team meetings using protocols that support effective analysis and discussions of student work. Data sources such as the school-based assessment tracker as well as the reading and writing progressions will be utilized to guide the discussions and make instructional decisions that positively impact the grade, sub-groups, and individual learners. In addition, regular inter-visitations will be scheduled so that teachers across the same grade and across the same content area can provide each other with feedback on the effectiveness of strategies and structures discussed in grade team and inquiry meetings. Collaboration among teacher teams will remain a priority for the coming school year. Teacher teams will have common planning periods at least three times a week in order to facilitate conversations and collaboration. In addition, time will be set aside during the year to look at data and have data talks. In addition to weekly meetings, teachers will engage in lesson studies. The lesson studies will engage teachers in developing a common language for instructional expectations, share instructional strategies, and build their content knowledge. Following the lesson studies, teachers will open up their classroom as lab sites in order gather data about their teaching practices, student engagement, and student learning. We are using a variety of tools strategically in order to capture the work of teacher teams. . How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher leaders will lead the work discussed and agreed upon to ensure school-wide cohesion and alignment. Teacher leaders will meet with administration to discuss the current successes and struggles teachers and subgroups are experiencing with work and the strategies being used. The team will also use evidence from school wide trends and the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  school assessment tracker to monitor the progress of action plans and make the necessary adjustments and instructional decisions needed to continue improving teacher practice and student achievement. Transparent collaboration among teacher teams aims to build capacity. This includes common planning, inter-visitations, professional development and it's impact on classroom instruction. Flexible scheduling will challenge SWDs and ENLs to reach their potential by streaming them into general classes during their strongest content area. The data is continuous looked at druing planning time and monitored through i-Ready and running records. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent F&P Progress monitoring Math Weekly Exams I-Ready Skills Analysis Periodic skills assessment Assess pedagogical practices and guide professional development Advance-Measures of Teacher Practice Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of teacher collaborative teams, focused on an inquiry approach, 35% of students in 3-5 grades will achieve level 3 or 4 on New York State ELA exam and NYS math exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Collaborative Teachers rating to Increase Students' academic Outcomes: Math Performing index to a minimum of 3.30 Increase Students' academic Outcomes: ELA Performance Index to 70 Increase Students' academic Outcomes: Math Proficiency Index to 91 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher teams will collaboratively plan, modify and revise units of study aligned with CCLS. They will use student data with an emphasis on addressing the needs of our ELLs and SWDs. Teachers will be given access to systems to effectively and efficiently collect, analyze, and articulate with each other around student achievement data. Teachers will identify instructional strategies to meet the needs of all students. The SWD and ELL liaisons will assist with identifying targeted and individualized strategies for students. Teacher teams across grades will work collaboratively with coaches and administration to revise K-5 literacy units to align to student needs and the rigor of CCLS including all applicable rubrics, charts, assessments, DOK Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All K-5 Teachers SWD and ELL students Rigorous instruction and ELA/Math Performance Index and Proficiency Ongoing from September 2018 to May 2019 Rating Principal, assistant principal, and coaches. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Unit plans and curriculum documents, agendas and attendance sheet All K-5 Teachers SWD and ELL students Rigorous instruction and ELA/Math Performance Index and Proficiency Ongoing from September 2018 to May 2019 Rating Principal, assistant principal, and coaches. Unit plans and curriculum documents, agendas and attendance sheets 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  questions, skills and strategies, guiding questions and End unit projects with a special focus on discussion and questioning. All K-5 Teachers SWD and ELL students Rigorous instruction and ELA/Math Performance Index and Proficiency Ongoing from September 2018 to May 2019 Rating Principal, assistant principal, and coaches. All K-5 Teachers SWD and ELL students Rigorous instruction and ELA/Math Performance Index and Proficiency Ongoing from September 2018 to May 2019 Rating Principal, assistant principal, and coaches. A debrief session after each 6-8 week unit will serve as the assessment for the impact of each curriculum. These meetings will include analysis of student work, discussion about next steps and revisions of the curriculum moving forward. We will monitor the success of this goal by checking the progress of each unit during bi-weekly coaches meetings, teacher observations and reviewing each unit and data at the completion of each unit. Mid-line performance tasks in writing will also serve as a mid-point benchmark for progress in literacy. By February we will have analyzed two units using students' work, rubrics, assessments and informal teacher evaluations to evaluate standards mastered and standards requiring additional focus in future units. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engageparents/families through a series of social and instructional gathering that will give families more access to the school by creating an environment where parents are empowered to ask questions and be active participants in their childrenoverall growing. September 2018-June 2019  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings,  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared,  Monthly PA meetings,   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days, assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) With the help of the school's CBO (Allianza), the school will provide opportunities for parents that will encourage a home-school connections where parents are empowered to be part of their children academic and social life in the school community. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master school wide assessment calendar ENL/SWD teachers’ push-in programming and articulation with classroom teachers Differentiated PD Calendar for Teacher Teams Literacy coaches and math coach to provide professional development to all teachers Classroom and leveled libraries Textbooks for all content areas Guided Reading Books Manipulatives and math supplies for all classrooms Desktops and printers for all classrooms Smart Boards for every classroom Chrome books for differentiated instruction and administration of Renewal common assessment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  i-Ready Ready NY IEP Liaison to support teachers with writing data driven IEP goals and to use data driven informed grouping and instruction Parent Engagement activities TC Reading and Writing KIt F and P Leveled Reading KIts Furniture such desks and conference tables, as well as desktops for the creation of a professional development and teachers resource room to serve as a common planning space Family Welcome Center Textbooks, material and supplies for After school and Saturday Programs School copy center to ensure distribution of school wide resources and materials to ensure multiple entry points as well as, school wide norms and protocols. 2 Reading specialists Technology Teacher to support teachers with the integration of technology in literacy and math as well as support implementation of Renewal Intervention initiatives Program teachers with 3 additional planning periods per week to build a culture of collaboration and data conscious community Per session teachers, coaches, AP and Principal for Saturday and after school programs Per diem to release teachers for professional development Generation Ready Consultant DISTRICT 6, MFSC and ORS RESOURCES and Personnel Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, as a result of 100% of teachers participating in collaborative teacher teams, focused on an inquiry approach, 32% of students will increase one level in ELA and Math as measured by i-ready. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-ready Mid-Year benchmark assessment will measure student increase. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? SOP: 2.3, 2.5 QR Indicator: 4.1, 4.2 School wide practices include regularly scheduled teacher team meetings that provide opportunities for teachers to engage in new curriculum and participate in formal protocols analyzing student work and relevant quality planning. Focused coaching cycles revolving around the observation of explicit teaching practices, using the Gradual Release of Responsibility Model, in whole and small group settings, with relevant and immediate feedback aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching (FfT). Schools Strengths School leaders provide training and consistently communicate high expectations connected to Common Core Curriculum Standards that lead students to a path of college and career readiness. Teachers will offer ongoing feedback on student progress to families. (Quality Review Report 2017-2018). School leaders and faculty will ensure that curricula is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. (Quality Review Report 2017-2018) Teachers and the leadership teams report seeing an increased quality and quantity of student writing across the content areas, curricular coherence across grades, and an increase in the use of non-fiction materials and research assignments in social studies and science. Priority Needs 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  There is a need to develop a common language and a shared understanding to assess teacher effectiveness and develop a school wide culture of high expectations and excellence. We will be using the Danielson framework to guide our coaching conversations with teachers as well as to monitor, analyze and assess teachers' professional growth and improvement in their teaching practices. Focus will be given to explicit teaching techniques that follow the gradual release of responsibility model, quality questioning techniques in the classroom, and with a focus on student led discussions. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Effective leadership at the Juan Pablo Duarte school involves building staff capacity though shared leadership. Staff members are encourage to take active roles in their own learning as well as supporting colleagues. Effective leadership at JPD involves collaborating with parents helping them become active members in the school by having a voice through the newly form Parent Association. Families are empowered by being informed through regular communication via parent meetings, coffee with the principal, classroom visits, monthly newsletter etc. Effective leadership at JPD involved a community that is in a safe environment where all constituents are encourged to take risks for the betterment of themselves as well as their peers. We believe everyone has a growth mindset and we learn by reflection and doing. Some example of what we believe effective leadership involves are: ● Our vision and mission is shared with all stakeholders in our building. At the beginning of the year, it is shared with the staff during our first staff conference in September and included in our Staff Handbook. Our vision is also included in our weekly newsletter, common planning sessions, and coaching cycle feedback of pedagogical practices. ● For our collaborations to be strengthened, we will include a common framework for teacher team meetings and collaborative planning time in our staff handbook. Special emphasis will also be given to establishing protocols for analyzing student work and promoting self led student conversations. Every common planning meeting will have an agenda, sign in sheet and the minutes. The minutes will be shared via Google docs with all constituents including the administration as a means of increasing communication. We will continue our inter-visitations to highlight “best practices” demonstrated by lead teachers and instructional coaches. ● To maximize our instructional time and focus on providing upper grade teachers with concentrated professional development in content areas, all students will have two periods of mathematics instruction, two periods of literacy instruction, and one period science/social studies. Grades 4-5 will be departmentalized with the strongest math teachers teaching mathematics and those that are stronger in literacy teaching the literacy component. We will utilize additional funding given to our school as a part of the Renewal process to provide additional staff and/or support. ● Teachers will be provided with support from consultants and instructional coaches to keep the pacing of instructional calendars for both literacy and mathematics that ensure that all critical areas and genres are covered in a timely manner throughout the school year. ● The school leader and assistant principal will provide informal and formal feedback on a regular basis through observation cycles using “Advance”. Targeted feedback will be provided to staff members via a conversation, hand-written note, and/or email. ● The administrators will oversee the literacy, mathematics, science/social studies content areas as well as the programming, special education, testing, and discipline aspect. Their main priority will be to support the implementation of more rigorous instruction at all grade levels as well as to become stronger instructional leaders. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43 ● Peer collaborative teachers, reading specialists, instructional coaches and classroom teachers are responsible for analyzing data to identify area(s) of growth and/or the need to make adjustments in order to plan instruction. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? As we continue to build capacity at the teacher level, we will continue to go deeper as to how we can increase teacher effectiveness through shared leadership and teacher feedback. It is the goals of the school to have effective and highly effective teachers in every classroom. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Our vision is for everyone in our school to have a clear understanding of our vision, mission and instructional focus. In order to norm and have a shared understanding, multiple opportunities will be provided, on a regular weekly basis, to revisit and connect to the decisions that are being made and the work that is being done throughout our building. We believe that through regular collaborative conversations, everyone in the school will have ownership of the vision, mission and instructional focus of the school. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Teachers throughout the building have been assigned different roles based on their area of expertise. We have instructional coaches that work with the teachers in setting structures that will strengthen the pedagogy in our building. The instructional coaches will facilitate meetings and professional development sessions for their colleagues. We will also have lead teachers self identify an area of strength that they believe they can use to support other teachers in the role of a buddy teacher. The goal is to value a strength in every staff member while developing a deeper sense of community in which all members are committed to moving our school forward. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? As per the Chancellor's Regulation, the SLT development the school's comprehensive education plan and collaborate with the alignment of the budget to fulfill the goals and action plans of the comprehensive educational plan. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Every four to six weeks Verbal feedback between 24 to 48 hours and written feedback within 3-5 days Providing Feedback grounded in DanielsonRubric. Administration conduct joint visitations to ensure norming 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Formative Data such as i-Ready Reports, NYSESLAT, IEPs, Running Records and Writing progress. Advance Reports Teacher Teams, Lead Teachers, Instructional Coaches, Assistant Principals, Principal, Academic Intervention Teachers and ENL Teachers Teacher Teams, Consultants, Administrators Teachers will use Writing Rubrics to review end of unit writing pieces, assess student work and identify areas to target when planning lessons in order to ensure that they are modifying their lessons to meet the individual needs of students. Teachers will look at NYSESLAT result and IEP goals for planning modifications. During weekly meetings, we will continue to analyze observation data and trends in order to develop a focus for observation cycles. We will closely analyze Measures of Teacher Performance data along with data collected during peer observations in an effort to support teacher practice and student learning. How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? In 4th and 5th grades, teacher programs will reflect departmentalization with teachers teaching one core content area across the grade. This will allow us to better meet the needs of all students by having teachers concentrating on teaching their content area of strength. Teacher programs will also have at least three common planning periods during the week for horizontal planning meetings and one common planning period per week for vertical planning. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders' meeting with teachers to review student data in order to plan appropriate small group instruction, at least 10% of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3c, as measured by end of year 2018-2019 Advance ratings. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Rigorous Instruction Improved Student Outcomes: ELA/Math Proficiency Ratings Improved Student Outcomes: ELA Performance Index Improved Student Outcomes: Math Performance Index 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will receive feedback from administration, coaches, and PCT or colleagues by using data to plan for academic discourse and student engagement. All teachers will participate in goal-setting and data review meetings with the administration. At these meetings, teachers will self-assess and review class data (i-Ready, F&P and math assessments) in literacy and math as indicators for progress towards end-of-year goals. Based on individual teacher needs, coaching cycles with specific and individualized goals will be run by in-house instructional coaches and Generation Ready consultant. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Rigorous Instruction 9/2018 ONGOING to June 2019 Administration Improved Student Outcomes All Teachers Rigorous Instruction 9/2018 ONGOING to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Improved Student Outcomes All Teachers Rigorous Instruction 09/2018 ON-GOING TO 6/2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Improved Student Outcome How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in teacher ratings of component 3c in Advance Increase of teacher growth through formal and informal observations Increase in correlation between Professional goals set and identified areas in need of improvement that will strengthen pedagogical practices Tracking teacher progress and effectiveness through formal and informal observations throughout the year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  Administration will participate in Teacher Effectiveness Training Principal and assistant principal Teacher teams will develop strategies (ie. turn and talk, cooperative learning, etc.) for ENLs, and SWDs. Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches and teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Teacher growth and support based on coaching cycles. Rigorous Instruction At least 2X a year Principal and Assistant Principal Advance Reports Improved Student Outcome Rigorous Instruction By Unit Principal and Assistant Principal Classroom Observation Improved Student Outcomes How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through a series of social and in instructional gathering that will give families more access to the school by creating an environment where parents are empowered to ask questions and be active participants in their children's overall growing. September 2018-June 2019  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings,  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared,  Monthly PA meetings,   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days, assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) With the help of the school's CBO (Allianza), the school will provide opportunities for parents that will encourage a home-school connections where parents are empowered to be part of their children academic and social life in the school community. . Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master observation and data meeting calendar Generation Ready Consultants Universal Literacy Coach Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Peer Collaborative Teachers Community School, DISTRICT 6, MFSC and ORS RESOURCES and Personnel Per-Session for teachers to conduct workshops Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders' meeting with teachers at least 2 times to review student data in order to plan appropriate differentiated instruction, at least 5% of all teachers will receive at least 2 ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3c, as measured by Advance ratings for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use Advance as the instrument of measure to assess progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x X x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? SOP: 6.4 QR Indicator: 1.3, 3.4 Ensure that resources and community partnerships provide support for families to understand their children’s needs leading to their academic and behavior success. We saw an increase in positive responses in the Strong Family -Community Ties section of the NYC School Survey in the following category:  Outreach to Parents – 94% positive responses that the school communicates with them in a language and way that they understand (NYC School Survey Report 2016-2017) Priority Need There is a need to provide parents/guardians with the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (NYC School Survey 2017-2018) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  P.S. 132 is a beacon of hope for the community. Our families have been an integral part of the renewal process this year. They receive information on a timely manner and are provided with opportunities to provide feedback during our community school forums and through parent surveys. Our families rely on the school for support and guidance in different aspects of their lives ranging from guidance in the area of their child's education to housing and legal support. There has always been an interest in and need for additional services and enrichment to be offered by our school. The community school model has turned P.S. 132 into a hub of learning for parents and community members. The model builds on the trust already evident and improve the lives of all stakeholders. It has strengthen the community as it strengthens the school. The staff greets parents and community members with respect and as the community school model takes root, relationships are being formed daily. We continue to learn together and solve problems together. Events and celebrations bring teachers and parents together in situations that lower the affective filter; reciprocal trust will be fostered and in that climate all members of the greater school community learn about and from each other. We have found that activities that involve children and their parents pay the greatest dividends. It is a design that we will advise our CBO partner to adopt and expand on. 1. Our school disseminates regular calendars and newsletters and/or ongoing communication in Spanish and English to families. We launched a smart phone application that will enable parents to get up-to-the-minute information about their children. We will expand this successful initiative to include our families and community members. We also host periodic Family Classroom Visit Days, so parents can visit their child’s classroom. 2. Our school distributes a survey for parents about their interests as well as their availability. The survey results are used to determine the workshops that will be offered as the best time to offer services. 3. Urban Arts Partnership, our CBO, provides monthly family workshops. 4. The feedback and suggestions received at the community forum is synthesized and used to make informed decisions about the support that is provided to parents. 5. Staff from P.S. 132 provides workshops to parents and orientation sessions to students about middle school choices and the application process. In addition, we have joint programs with middle schools such as IS 528 to support our parents and students in transitioning to middle school. 6. Offerings for adult learning will be determined by the needs of the community. 7. We use the New Visions Data Sorter to track attendance and provide parents with data pertaining to their child's academic growth. We encourage and recognize the value of parent involvement in their children's education. We will establish a culture of parental involvement in order for our students to be and feel supported at home in achieving their academic goals. This will also aid in supporting our students in their social-emotional development and growth. We will continue to focus on the need to increase parent involvement as evidenced by parent sign-in sheets, school surveys and parental feedback. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Parents are invited to come and visit the school at any time. Time set aside during open house events and parent engagement days. The Parents' Association room is open to parents during the day. We will provide all staff members including the office staff and safety officers with training on how to welcome our families into our school. The main office/ Welcome Center is arranged to provide an inviting space for parents as they enter the school. parents receive a parent Handbook at the beginning of the year and monthly calendars. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  The school will engage parents and families through a series of social and instructional gathering that will give families more access to the school by creating an environment where parents are empowered to ask questions and be active participants in their children overall growing. September 2018-June 2019  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings,  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared,  Monthly PA meetings,   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days, assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) " How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The school will engage families through a series of social and in instructional gathering that will give families more access to the school by creating an environment where parents are empowered to ask questions and be active participants in their children's overall growing. September 2018-June 2019  Quarterly Coffee with the Principal meetings,  Monthly SLT meetings where data is shared,  Monthly PA meetings,   Parent Association and CBO events  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Curriculum Learning Opportunities: Families will receive information about the the NYS ELA and Math Family Classroom Visit Days, assessments, the school's instructional Focus (i.e4. Gradual Release model and how the explicit teaching/modeling)  Understanding the IEP  ENL students are services  Adult learning Opportunities (GED, ESL, Technology) With the help of the school's CBO (Allianza), the school will provide opportunities for parents that will encourage a home-school connections where parents are empowered to be part of their children academic and social life in the school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  We have weekly parent engagement meetings with families. We acknowledge that parents know the student better than anyone and that they can provide valuable information about how we can relate to their children so that we can be more effective instruction. 94% of the student at Juan Pablo Duarte are from a Latino background. Other than Spanish there ae no other languages represented in the school. The school staff is more than 50% Spanish speakers and are able to communicate with families in the family's comfort language. parents are encouraged to attend meeting and learning experiences with their children. The school makes accommodation for strollers and a separate room for nursing as necessary. Working parents are encouraged to share their availability. In the event that it is early morning, the staff member is covered by another staff in order to facilitate the meeting. If it is a late meeting, staff members are compensated in order for them to be able to facilitate the meeting. We also encourage conference calls, emails and phone texting. The entire school community is undertaking a social emotional 4-week cycle on addressing student behavior and including responding to students as well as parents with the understanding that all voices should be respected. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Workshops On-line program Classroom visits The more knowledgeable that parents are about curriculum and expectations, the better that they will be able to support academic growth at home. Parents will be able to support students at home by simply knowing the options that are available and setting routines in place that ensure that students are using the programs that the school is providing The more visible that parents are in the school, the clearer the message that is being sent supporting the belief that education matters. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Class Parents Family partnerships with CBO: Attending programs/ activities with their child Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? No What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We will continue to offer English as a Second Language classes, parent enrichment workshops, citizenship courses and financial literacy to adults within our community. The school offers evening adult education and provides child care. Parents receive monthly newsletters with information regarding adult learning. Posters are displayed throughout the school community and flyers are sent home in the family's preferred language,. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Attendance, assignments, weekly math quiz results, report cards Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to improve parental involvement, there will be a 10% increase in the number of parents attending school-wide activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Activity Report,compared to the number of parents attending school-wide activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the 2017-2018 Parent Coordinator Activity Report. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Attendance Supportive Environments Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The CBO, will strategically develop parent-teacher outreach opportunities, events, and school-community partnerships so that there will be a 10% increase in parent and community participation of said events as measured by the NYC School Survey and by parent attendance sheets. We will encourage and support attendance at Parent Association meetings, curriculum conferences, parent-teacher conferences, coffee hour and parent workshops. We will continue to encourage families to establish ongoing communication with us regarding student progress towards meeting school standards and expectations, disciplinary concerns Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Supportive Environment Attendance 10/2018 ON-GOING TO 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Counselor, CBO 10/2018 ON-GOING TO 6/2019 Principal, Teachers, Assistant Principal, Parent Association, Parent Coordinator All K-5 Families Supportive Environment Improve Student Outcomes Attendance All K-5 Families Supportive Environment 10/2018 ON-GOING TO 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal ,All Teachers Improve Student Outcomes How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in parent participation in workshops and school Sign-in sheets at meetings and events. Increase in parent participation in workshops and school Sign-in sheets at meetings and events. Increase in parent participation in workshops and school events / conferences. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  and ways to best support their children's development. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Books Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Parent Coordinator Per-session funding for Teachers for evening Workshop sessions Furniture for Family Welcome Center Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, their will be a 10% increase in the number of parents attending meetings / conferences. The progress of this goal will be monitored through parent sign-in sheets for P.A meetings, workshops and school events. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The PCAR is the is the instrument of measure to assess progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percent of students reading on grade level will increase by 10% as measured by NY State test in ELA compared to the 2018 ELA state results. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our program has both a voluntary and compulsory component. 100% of our students attend an additional hour and fifteen minutes of academic instruction on Tuesdays through Fridays from 2:20 to 3:35pm. After 3:35pm, students have the option of participating in the after-school program that consists of homework support, additional opportunities to use on-line support programs that are implemented school-wide and extracurricular activities such as dance, sports and arts and crafts. The voluntary component is available to students Mondays through Fridays for an additional two (2) hours. 88% of our student population is currently attending the voluntary component of our ELT program. Our after school program will immediately follow the ELT hour, running from 3:35 -5:35 p.m. on Tuesdays through Fridays and 2:20-4:20 Mondays. We seek to engage up to 20 1st graders, up to 30 2nd graders, up to 30 3rd graders, up to 30 4th graders, and up to 30 5th graders (including the lowest 1/3). Rich extracurricular programs that include music, drama, sports, STEAM, and reading tutoring are intended to encourage student participation. To encourage student attendance at the non-mandatory extended learning time hours, we will invite families to join our music, and other art infused classes. As we offer during the regular day, we will also personalize our communication efforts, making regular phone calls and home visits whenever necessary. Part 3 – ELT Program Description 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation?  A range of activities will be provided during ELT through i-Ready and Imagine Learning. Students will participate in the various activities based on their needs and identified areas that will promote academic success. Teachers will simply expand their day, devoting time to ELA and math intervention and enrichment. In grades 2-5 small group work will consist of lessons from i-ready teacher tool kit, math re-teach group.  There will be alignment of the ELT program with the school’s instructional focus and programs. Small group work consist of guided reading, language experiences and/or math re-teach while other students are working on Imagine Learning. Students will engage on Imagine Learning until they reach mastery and transition to i-Ready.  The arts and technology will be used as a medium to develop content area mastery through a practical hands-on approach.  New content will be introduced via technology and/or special programs.  The arts are an integral part of our school’s programs. Students in k-2 participate in a visual art class at least once a week and a music theory class (Music and the Brain) twice a week during the regular school day. However, through our collaboration with our CBO during the voluntary component of ELT, we will provide additional opportunities through arts integration, chorus, dance, and more.  100% of our teachers are NYS certified. We will provide joint PD to all staff members and CBO personnel.  PD activities will take place during and after school hours. They will be provided by instructional coaches from P.S. 132, as well as consultants.  Outreach to parents will be made via parent meetings, newsletters and weekly parent outreach session in English and Spanish languages. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  3. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? Administrative team (Principal and Assistant Principal), Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Teaching and CBO staff and outside artists will be responsible for designing and implementing the ELT program. From 2:20 pm – 3:35 pm, the focus will be on academics four times a week. This time will be an extension of the school day with all students receiving instruction from a certified teacher. In a joint effort with Urban Arts, UA will provide emotional intervention support. In addition, Urban Arts provide consulting services from Generation Ready to support teacher development in guided Reading. The impact on student achievement will be evaluated by disaggregated weekly i-ready data during whole school professional development. Incentives are established by class and school wide around the number of lessons mastered and the number of minutes on task. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our ELT program will begin on September 5, 2018 (the first day of school) and end on the last full day of school on June 25, 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Funding to support 17 teachers to teach five ELT hours per week for the Expanded Learning Time, we will use funding allocated through the CBOs for the Community School Model. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, there will be at least a 10% increase in the number of students in grades 2-5 who will be reading on or above grade level, as measured by the mid year February 2019 i-Ready ELA assessment, compared to the number of students reading on or above grade level on the September 2018 baseline i-Ready ELA assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  i-Ready Diagnostic. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to improve parental involvement, there will be a 10% increase in the number of parents attending community school activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Activity Report, compared to the number of parents attending community school activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the 2017-2018 Parent Coordinator Activity Report. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Increase in student performance: ELA/Math Performance Index Attendance Increase in student performance: ELA/Math Proficiency Ratings Rigorous Instruction Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Urban Arts Partnership Grades K-5 Students Mental health, attendance, health services, housing, Urban Arts Partnership Grades 1-5 Students Sports Program Catholic Charities:Alianza Dominicana Grades 1-5 Students After school enrichment Catholic Charities:Alianza Dominicana Grades 1-5 Students Summer Camp Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 2. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  3. 4. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work.  The school has paired with Urban Arts and through a needs assessment established an art-focused program throughout the day as well as after school.  All of our students will participate in the academic component of the Expanded Learning Time (ELT).  Parents will be invited to be a part of the SLT, the Community School Team, the PA,Title I Committee and school volunteers as well as participate in the decision-making process in our school.  Our DSR will provide ongoing coaching and support as well as help monitor the progress of our Community Schools Model. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Our Parent Coordinator, Urban Arts Partnership Community School Director and administration will be responsible for overseeing and implementing the Community School program. Parent workshops on CCLS aligned programs will support parents in further developing their awareness of how they can best support their child's academic growth at home. Our Community School Director will become an active member of our school community through participation in Schools Leadership Team and Parents' Association meetings. The New Visions Data Sorter will be used to identify students that are at risk academically and are chronically or severely chronically absent. As an intervention for identified students with attendance problems, we will implement success mentoring strategies monitored the UAP social worker. The New Visions Data Sorter will also be used to communicate on an on-going basis with parents regarding their child's academic growth. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Teachers Administrators Paraprofessional for the academic support of one to one students remaining in school for ELT. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Instructional resources / Chromebooks / iPads Schedule adjustments and flexibility with teachers' schedules that facilitate the maximum participation by staff members Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 5. 2018 (Full Roll out ELT Begins) June 25, 2019 (ELT Ends) Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom 20% of readers/class or gradeasper running records, GatesMacGinitie, writingassessment and NY State Test. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Reading Rescue i-Ready One-to-one Guided Reading Small group SPIRE Mathematics Lowest thirdas per beginning of year assessment and NYState Test. Additional academic support; reinforcement of foundational skills (iReady) Small group One-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, Extended Learning Time, After school, Saturday Academy, Super Saturday During the school day, Extended Learning Time, After school, Saturday Academy, Super Saturday Science English Language Learners and/or bottom third Small group orELTgroup by bilingual or ENL Teacher Social Studies English Language Learners and/or bottom third Small group orELT groupsbilingual or ENL Teacher Small group Small group During the school day, Extended Learning Time, After school, and Saturday Academy During the school day, Extended Learning Time, After school, and Saturday Academy 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance issues; informal and formal recommendations; parental request; crisis management and number of incidents as reported on OORS. Conflict resolution; peer mediation; overcoming obstacles; self-management One-to-One and small groupby service providers During the school day, Extended Learning Time, After school At risk services provided byGuidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker and Providers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 66 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The students in temporary housing will be provided with the following services: 1) transportation services, 2) graduation, admissions fee coverage for trips 3) school uniforms and supplies 4) after school programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Professional learning opportunities are differentiated based upon teachers’ strengths and areas for improvement. We also believe strongly in the power of teacher collaboration and collective inquiry as a form of professional learning. As a result, we are actively structuring time for: (a) grade level meetings; (b) data analysis meetings; (c) Inquiry team meetings; (d) collaborative walks; and (e) model classroom inter-visitations .When a vacancy is created, the school's administration works with the Department of Human Resources (DHR) to review the list of applicants and ensure that the applicants that are interviewed are highly qualified. The administrative team also attends Central borough hiring fairs in order to pull from the best qualified. During the school year, staff members receive training on implementation of skills and strategies that result in better student outcomes. As a follow up, they also receive feedback on the implementation of identified skills/strategies. If a staff member is not highly qualified, funding is set aside to provide the necessary training, courses or assessments that will result in the staff member meeting the requirements to become highly qualified. New teachers to the building are paired off with a mentor teacher to provide them with support, guidance and a smooth transition into our school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  The administrative team is fully dedicated to supporting educators through high quality professional learning opportunities throughout the school year. Professional learning is differentiated based upon teachers’ strengths and areas for improvement. Professional learning takes three primary forms: (a) on or off-site conferences or workshops; (b) model classroom / debrief sessions; and (c) in-classroom coaching. Generally, the more apparent teachers’ individual strengths and areas of need become, the more we utilize an in-classroom model of specifically-targeted, real-time coaching. High quality professional development will be provided for principal, assistant principal, instructional coaches, teachers and paraprofessionals throughout the school year. These professional development activities are geared toward providing each constituent with the skills and knowledge that will empower them to help students meet the Common Core Learning Standards The Principal and Assistant Principal attend monthly district wide meetings that support them in helping to move teacher practice through the use of Advance. They also participate in activities and study groups to help build their leadership capacity in supporting teachers in improving their instructional practices. The teachers participate in weekly professional development sessions and attend workshops provided by the DOE or UFT . Another form of professional development that we are offering is inter-school and inter-class visitation. Staff members have an opportunity to visit their colleagues and observe first hand the teaching and/or implementation of identified strategies. Through direct coaching they are also offered an opportunity to implement best practices.. Paraprofessionals attend district wide meetings and also received a series of workshop trainings from RAMAPO on how to best support students with challenging behaviors. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  The school provides orientation sessions to preschool parents. We also plan to have an open house for incoming kindergarten students and their parents twice during the school year , prior to them entering kindergarten in September. Kindergarten and first grade parents are allowed to take their child directly to the classroom as a means of providing a smooth transition and building stronger ties between the teachers and parents. Joint professional development sessions on time management, effective communication, reading strategies and Kindergarten expectations are provide by the P.S. 132 staff. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Members of the Assessment Committee team work collaboratively to review/discuss the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and professional development that will be provided to the entire staff. Teachers are provided training on the administration, interpretation and use of i-Ready and Gates MacGinitie in order to use the results to group students for small group instruction and make informed instructional decisions that will result in improved student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 275,307.00 16,979.00 137,312.00 133,530.00 24,014.00 35,310.00 2,956,632.00 X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 4, 5 and 6 Section 4, 5 and 6 Sections 4, 5 and 6 Section 5 Section 4, 5 and 6 Section 4 and 5 Section 4, 5 and 6 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 132 Juan Pablo Duarte, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Juan Pablo Duarte School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g. literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making to support the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and language that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day/Night events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library with instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand P.S. 132 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 132M, The Juan Pablo Duarte School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 20 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Our Title III program will support English as a New Language Learners (ENLs) in achieving higher levels of academic achievement in core academic content areas through language development. The goal of our Title III program is to afford our students with the resources that will enhance their background and content knowledge in math and promote college and career readiness by developing higher-order thinking skills. The program has been designed to incorporate state and national learning standards, scaffolds in English and high-quality supports and extensions to yield student work products that reflects high levels of thinking, participation, and ownership. Various learning styles were considered by incorporating activities in which students will learn by reading, seeing, hearing and doing, with a focus on targeting the needs of ENLs with special needs. Our supplemental Title III program will target ninety-seven (97) English as a New Language Learners in grades 2-5. 13 out of this 97 students are ELLs in self contained special education classes. Our goal is to provide an enrichment program that is aligned to our school's instructional focus: “Using a gradual release method to foster academic understanding through explicit instruction.” An analysis of our ELL population in upper grades shows that there are twenty-four 24 new arrivals who have 0 years of service in New York City Public Schools; there are 50 students who have 3-5 years of service. Regardless of the level obtained in the various assessments ( NYSESLAT, i-Ready, and Fountas & Pinnell) all identified students still need additional support in vocabulary development, phonics, listening and speaking skills, as well as math skills. We have therefore designed a program that addresses the needs of the above mentioned 97 ELLs in grades 2-5. These students will receive instruction in English and Spanish using ESL methodologies. The students will participate in this enrichment programs during our Saturday Academy for seventeen (17) weeks, which will be take place from January 5, 2019 to May 18, 2019, from 9:00am-12:00pm on the following dates: January 5, 12, 19, 26 February 2, 9, 16 March 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 April 6, 13 May 4, 11, 18 One (1) administrator will supervise the program from 8:30am - 12:30pm Five (5) certified bilingual/ESL teachers will provide instruction. Each teacher will be responsible for teaching one component of the program to three (3) different groups of students (Group 1, 2, & 3) or (Groups 4, 5, & 6). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Instruction will be provided as follows: Math instruction in students' native language ,as well as English, using a variety of hands-on activities which includes the use of manipulatives., grouping for collaborative conversations geared toward increasing their vocabulary bank in mathematics and oral language development. We will address all four language modalities with a focus on targeting writing and speaking for this school year. The drama component will help to develop academic language, foster oral language development and build self confidence in our students. We will evaluate progress through the administration of our in-house weekly math pre and post assessments and end of year NYSESLAT and NYS Math results from the Spring 2019 assessment. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Throughout the year, all teachers, including ELL and bilingually certified teachers are provided with on-going professional development based on their interest and identified areas of need. These professional development sessions have been scheduled during the Mondays allotted time for PD as well as during the school day. Professional development opportunities are also provided by staff developers from Generation Ready and Math Solutions.Through our professional development activities we will engage teachers in a cycle of professional development session that will support them in planning and refining their instructional practices around effective strategies that will result in enhanced academic language development. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parent engagement activities are geared toward engaging parents and families in the various aspects of school life by creating a culture of collaboration that supports their child's language acquisition.From January 2019 through May 2019, workshops and activities that encourage and support parental participation and promote academic success are offered school-wide on a monthly basis.Families are invited to participate in workshops in which reading and mathematics strategies will be shared with participants. Our Title III committee, made up of 3 teachers, 3 parents, and 1 administrator, will look for opportunities to provide parents of ELLs with a series of workshops that will increase parental involvement which will lead to higher academic achievement for our ELLs. Parents will be invited via letters, flyers and phone calls to meetings that will empower them to support their child at home by using the strategies and skills learned at the workshop sessions. The workshops and activities offered to parents and families will be facilitated by teachers, parents, administrators, parent coordinator and community organizations. Translation services will be available for all meetings. Parents and families will be notified via back-pack flyers, email, Parent Association meetings and parent coordinator outreach. All notifications will be sent home in the parents' identified language of preference for communications. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Conceptually Consolidated Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. CC Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, Consolidated CC Conceptually Consolidated CC 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL CC Conceptually Consolidated CC $26,702 CC CC CC cc 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 06 School Name Juan Pablo Duarte Elementary School School Number 132 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Torres-Maheia Coach Tasha Ellin ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Belinda Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Joanna Estades/Reading Teacher/Subject Area Awilda Estrella/ESL Related-Service Provider Fanny Santos Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Phyllis O'Neil Coach Pedro Cruz School Counselor Digna Rodriguez Parent Reina Marte Parent Coordinator Nelson Rojas Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Diana Santos - coach C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 251 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84 Total number of ELLs 115 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.82%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 1 0 1 4 1 0 1 3 1 0 1 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 5 0 0 1 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments are being used to guide instructional planning for our ELLS: Fountas and Pinnell Reading Record (English) EDEL running records (Spanish) to identify students' reading levels; I-ready and Imagine Learning (new arrivals and first year ELLs) to diagnose students' learning needs (reading and math); Fundations unit test for grade K-2; End of unit tests and Modules tests for Go math, English and Spanish; Passport to Social Studies unit tests in English and Harcourt end of unit tests for Science in Spanish, End of Unit Performance Tasks in writing and math, weekly math quizzes (for Saturday school) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher-teams to analyze students' work and data once a month Inquiry Protocol/norms are provided for teacher-teams school-wide Training and professional development will be provided on how to analyze students' work and data. Teacher/administrator data talks specific to current student data 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Baseline/benchmark assessments in writing and math are given to students in English and/or Spanish. Phonics assessment (Fundations) in grades K-2 is given during the beginning, middle and end of the year. iReady and Imagine Learning diagnostic tests are given to students in grade K-5 three times a year. Home Language Arts Spanish Performance Assessment is given twice a year, BOY and EOY. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, we utilize the following structures to address intervention: First grade level teams will meet and analyze data. Targeted students will be identified and grouped based on their learning needs. The following programs are used in English for intervention : SPIRE program for Tier I and Tier II intervention Reading recovery for struggling readers Fundations (Grade 3) for intervention Imagine Learning The following programs are used in Spanish for intervention : 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RTI team is composed of the following teachers: IEP Teacher, an ENL teacher, School Counselor. The RTI team is meeting twice a month. Data of the students referred by the classroom teachers will be reviewed and analyzed by the RTI team. By analyzing the results from NYSESLAT, F&P,LLI, etc., the team will determine what kind of intervention (Tier I/Tier II/TierIII) and program to be used. SPIRE program for Tier I and Tier II intervention Reading recovery for struggling readers Quick Reads for fluency 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome of NYSELAT, ELA /Math state assessment data are used to evaluate and inform our ELL Programs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  Using The 2018 ELL Data Analysis Tool, it reveals that the strengths and needs of our ENLs are as the follows: Strengths Needs 1st grade reading writing 2nd grade speaking writing 3rd grade speaking writing 4th grade speaking writing 5th grade speaking writing Based on the analysis, writing is our focus area that needs to be improved across the school. Our school is going to utilize TCRWP (Teachers College Writers Workshop Program) to develop our ENLs' writing skills. TCRWP is structured in a way that is predictable. This is especially supportive for students who are developing English (emergent bilinguals). The workshop model is also structured to allow for individualized instruction. However, for English Language Learners, this instruction must consider not only their literacy skills but also their language development. Using TCRWP, our teachers will collect language samples from students and study these to identify and plan next steps for the learner. Grade level teams will meet and make instructional decisions based on their findings. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Using the current data (NYSESLAT 2018) , the LAP TEAM will compare the results with the data from the previous years. During professional development, the LAP TEAM members will share the findings to the staff. ENL teachers provide NYSESLAT test results to teachers. This helps to make necessary adjustments to our ENL program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have one integrated ENL class per grade in K, 1, 2, 4 and 5 in the General Education classes (Freestanding Model) and three Self Contained Special Education Classes (K-2, 3-4 & 4-5) with mixed proficiency levels where an ENL teacher follows the Push-In/Pull out Model to support current and former ELLS as per CR Part 154.2. (Pull-out for Entering and Emergent Students, Push-in for the rest of the students). We have one Standalone Model in grade 3. The students are grouped heterogeneously. In grades 4 and 5, students are also grouped by block. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. We have one Dual Language class in Kindergarten. In our DL program, the teacher is bilingual certified and provides the mandated services to all ENLs as per CR Part 154.2. We follow a self contained model where students are with the same teacher all day and are grouped heterogeneously. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The LAP Team reviews the NYSESLAT data in the beginning of the school year and determines the minutes the ENLs receive as per CR Part 154.2. Entering and Emergent students receive 360 minutes of ESL/ELL instruction per week. The Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction per week .Commanding students receive 90 minutes of instruction for two consecutive years. ENL services are provided in all content areas to ensure mandated minutes are provided. HLA is provided as a 50/50 model (Spanish) . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding/DL For English Language Arts, our school is using Teachers College Readers and Writers Workshop Program. Teachers engage in planning sessions to make curricular adjustments to address the needs of ENLs. Looking at Student Work Protocol supports teachers in making adjustments to the curriculum in order to provide multiple entry points for students based on their language development needs. In addition, teachers use guided reading principles to support students' learning needs. Our school uses the Teachers College writing curriculum. At the beginning of each unit of study in writing, students are given an on-demand assessment. The writing samples are scored using a uniformed, coherent scoring tool known as the Writing Progression for all three writing genres, narrative, informational and opinion writing. As such, teachers are able to adjust unit plans and provide targeted instruction in order to support the development of writing. Freestanding/DL Math in Focus is used as our core mathematics program. Students are provided instruction in both English and the home language in grade K. Students are assessed regularly and data is collected to determine the need for additional intervention. Using the curriculum’s Response to Intervention instructional supports, teachers provide students with additional academic support. Freestanding/DL In grades K-5, our school has a science (Pearson) and social studies (Passport to Social Studies) curriculum aligned with New York City’s scope and sequence. Through the science and social studies programs, students learn content in English and Spanish. Students also learn science and social studies through research which follows the New York City Scope and Sequence. Science, Social Studies, Math and ELA is 50% in the Home Language. Some of the methods used to support the ENLs are: visual support for vocabulary development, sentence stems to support oral language development, TRP (total physical response), shared reading and writing activities, cognate connections, building background knowledge, role playing, explicit instruction, multi-sensory techniques and collaborative discussions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Our students are evaluated in their home language throughout the school year. Students are tested using Sistema de evaluacion de la lectura to help determine their independent and instructional reading levels. The assessments are administered three times per year during our benchmark assessment periods. This helps us measure our students’ progress over time. Using this comprehensive assessment, we measure students’ oral language, reading, and writing, development in their home language. Home Language Arts Spanish Performance Assessment is given twice a year, BOY and EOY. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE and Newcomer students receive support provided by the bilingual reading specialist in a small group. The teacher supports the instruction using Reading Recovery strategies and guided reading. Developing students receive small group instruction with the ENL teachers in the content areas after the classroom teacher gives students the lesson objective. Long term students are given additional support in small groups once they begin independent practice on lessons presented in the classroom. Former ELLs are given continued integrated ENL support for 90 minutes per week as per CR Part 154.2. They work in small groups with either the classroom teacher or the ENL teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers display vocabulary word walls with picture support to help students development academic language. Teachers use technology to allow students to listen to grade-level texts so they can participate in small group and class discussions. ENL teachers use TPR strategies to support students' understanding of language development. Teachers incorporate the SIOP model during planning of lessons. Grade level materials used by the general education population is also used for ELL SWDs . 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All teachers of SWDs follow the common core aligned curriculum with modifications and adaptations according to the needs of the students and to make sure that students with IEPs meet their goals and attain Englsih Proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Classroom teachers work with all related service providers in using multisensory approaches to provide access to the general education curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school has a dedicated guided reading intervention period for all students in grades K-5, 5 days per week. During the intervention period, students are provided with targeted intervention based on their needs. Data from Fountas and Pinnell/ Sistema de la evaluacion de la lectura is analyzed to determine the students’ academic needs/grouping. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As a year 5 renewal school, all of our students receive one additional hour of instruction. Furthermore, as a community school, students will have access to an after-school program sponsored by Catholic Charities. This program will provide academic support and arts programs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  Our school will be incorporating a guided reading intervention period into our daily schedule for all of our students in grades K-5. Teachers and academic intervention service providers will provide targeted intervention to students in small group. In order to better prepare students for college and careers, our students will engage in research projects in social studies. The research projects will be aligned to the New York City Science and Social Studies scope and sequence. The students will have access to the school technology lab, Chromebooks and iPads in order to facilitate research and strengthen their reading and math skills using iReady, Imagine Learning and Imagine Math. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. A Saturday program is being offered to our immigrant students to provide additional support in Mathematics in order to improve performance on weekly quizzes and the NYS Math exam. They also have access to participate in the CBO after school program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ENLs are TCRWP, Math in Focus, Ready Math, Pearson Science and Passport to Social Studies. Fundations is used in grades K-2. Imagine Learning is used to support SIFE and Newcomers. All ENLs have access to use of iReady, Imagine Math and Imagine Learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We follow the state mandated units of study. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our Language Coordinator and Team make sure that students receive all mandated services and that resources are available in the correct langauge. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we are a co-located school, resources are used independently based on the needs and vision of each school. TCRWP mentor texts, trade books, iPads, interactive white boards, document cameras, Go Math instructional materials, TC Writing Units of Study, Spanish Language Libraries, Estrellitas (Phonics), Fundations (Intervention), Quick Reads (fluency) and Leveled Literacy Intevention ( Reading Comprehension) are materials and resources used in the school. ELLs socioemotional needs are met by the school guidance counselor and social worker from the Urban Arts Project. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently, there is no before the school year program for newly enrolled ENLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Our school is using a self-contained dual language model. In the classes, EPs and ENLs are integrated 100% of the time. b. Literacy, Science and Social Studies are taught in English and Spanish alternated by units of study. Mathematics is taught in English and Spanish in alternate day cycles. c. Teachers in the dual language program follow a 50/50 model where the language is separated according to the subject area and unit of study. d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school provides Professional Development every Monday as well as on City's Professional Development days. Most of our PDs take place in-house (Mondays) and some will take place at different locations (TC trainings, SPIRE, etc). Professional development sessions are differentiated according to the needs of teachers/paraprofessionals such as (ENL-SWD, DL, ENL), Subject specific :4 th and 5 th grade departmentalization). Specific series of PDs will be will ongoing throughout the school year. Our school has 4 instructional coaches and 2 peer collaborative teachers to support staff with planning and improving pedagogy through best practices in order to ensure that all learners, including ENLs and SWDs, have equal access to learning. Our school is providing a wide range of PDs for all teachers including teachers of ENLs and ENL-SWDs. Examples of PDs are: -Adjusting TC Reading/ Writing Units to meet students’ needs - Educators will adapt ENL strategies that they will utilize in their instruction; therefore ensuring that all students are provided with access to the school’s Common Core aligned Curriculum. -Strategies to help with Social-Emotional Issues -Independent Reading Strategies -Grade Level Planning - where Educators will adjust the school’s Common Core aligned Curriculum and analyzing students' work in order to ensure that multiple entry points to the lessons are provided; therefore affording all students (ENLS and ENL-SWD) the opportunity to access the curriculum. -Orton-Gilingham / Wilson / Fundations training 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirements are meet during our 90 Monday professional meetings. The meetings are facilitated by bilingual certified instructional coaches who include ESL strategies in their presentations. Materials distributed for math are in English and Spanish to support the learning of ENL students. The ELA unit has an ESL component to support ENL students. Attendance and agenda records are kept for all PD sessions. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All Teachers meet with parents of ELLs during Parent Engagement time. Translation is available to all teachers if needed. If parent are unable to attend the mandated time for parent engagement, teachers and administrators are available if parents choose to schedule individual meetings to discuss goals, assessments and language development needs in content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent engagement activities are geared towards engaging all parents and families, including those of ENL and ENL-SWD, in the various aspects of school life by creating a culture of collaboration that supports their children's English language acquisition. Parents are an integral part of our community. We work very closely with members of the parents association. We have a group of parent volunteers that provide our staff with support in the classrooms, hallways, cafeteria, bathrooms and contacting other parents when needed. Sample activities include: Empowering parents to help their children with homework After-school Adult ENL classes Family Night How to become a buddy reader at home Using technology programs (iReady, Imagine Learning) at home to develop academic skills Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Torres-Maheia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Juan Pablo Duarte School DBN: 06M132 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Jessica Torres-Maheia Principal Phyllis O'Neil Nelson Rojas Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Belinda Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Reina Marte Parent Christine Fitzgibbons/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Fanny Santos/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Tasha Ellin Pedro Cruz Coach Coach Digna Rodriguez School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Alice Cohen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member FSC Fanny Santos Other Special Education Stephanie Rosman Other Reading Diana Santos Other coach 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 12/14/2018 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06m132 School Name: Juan Pablo Duarte Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication we have looked at the data from the ATS reports (RCPL, RECF, RCON, RAPL and RADL), Home Language Survey, Blue Emergency Card, one to one conversations and Surveys conducted. Our goal is to communicate, whenever feasible, with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support: •parent-school accountability •parent access to information about their children’s educational options 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  •parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement Based on our analysis of HILS, we identified parents as Hispanic, Native Americas, Black, Asian, and White. We encourage parents every month during the PA meetings to keep all students' information updated on the blue card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language According to our records we have parents who speak English, Spanish and Adangme. We have a total of 120 parents with a preferred English Language as the Spoken Language and 336 who prefer Spanish as the Spoken Language, Spoken Adangme 1 parent. . We have 121 parents who prefer the English Written Language as compared to 336 who prefer Spanish as the Written language. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  lateness's Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent program choice letters, placement in special education program, Conference letters, School notices about school closing, testing, policies, new programs, Health forms, PA meetings notices, School Leadership, absences or lateness notifications, Title I committee, Title III Committee, Language Allocation Policy Committee, Translation and Interpretation Committee. Parents’ consent forms programs, trips, events, parent-teacher conference communication letter, Student of the month celebrations as well as cultural celebrations (independence day celebrations), science fair, Graduation, Parents Orientations, Instructional plan, parent workshop calendar, students’ academic goals for math and literacy, Student/Parent Handbook, Parent Involvement Policy, School-Parent Compact and pamphlets/brochures. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Many staff members are available to provide translation and interpretation in order to increase written and oral communication. In house staff members are always able and available to provide translation at general meetings (formal face-to-face interactions) for those non-English speaking parents. If needed a per session teacher will be hired to translate. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  General meetings are considered as follow: early registration, ongoing registration, end of the year regular registration, monthly parent meetings, parent association monthly meetings, fund-raising meetings for 5th grade graduation and end of the year 5th Grade Graduation meeting, IEP meetings, Literacy and Math Family nights, LAP committee meetings, Title I committee meetings, Title III committee meetings, Response to Intervention Ream meetings, Translation and interpretation committee meetings. School Leadership committee meetings, Etc. We also have informal face-to-face interactions with parents through the year; During Parent–Teacher meetings and during Parent-Teacher Conferences held during the fall 2016 and during the spring of 2017. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We created a Language Team which meets weekly and is available to support teachers with language concerns. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  Welcome posters are displayed around the school. The Parents Bill of Rights was shared with the parents who attended the Parents' Association meeting at the school and were sent home with all the students. The Parents' Guide to Language Access is available to all the parents. The Language ID Guide is posted at the security desk and the main office. As a school, we provide interpretation services, to the maximum extent practicable within the budget appropriated for services, during regular business hours, to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate with school staff and school officials regarding critical information about their child’s education. The interpretation services are provided either at school or by telephone. A copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in English and Spanish was sent home to all the parents and copies are available in the Parent Association office as well as in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will conduct 2 surveys (Mid and End of the year) to gather feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of language translation and interpretation services. We will also have one to one conversations with parents in order to find out how they feel about the quality and availability of language and interpretation services provided at the school. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99 
