2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75M138 School Name: P.S. 138 Principal: GREGG SOULETTE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P138M 307500011138 K-12 School Number (DBN): 75M138 144 East 128 th Street, New York, NY 10035 212 369-2227 212 427-6608 Phone Number: Fax: Gregg Soulette Gsoulet@schools,nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gregg Soulette Michelle Arellano April Bowman Bea Pohl N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 802-1503 Phone Number: District 75 FSC: 212 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kathleen LeFevre Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: klefevr@schools.nyc.gov (Kathleen LeFevre, District 75 Liaison) 400 First Avenue NY 10010 Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gregg Soulette Michelle Arellano April Bowens N/A N/A N/A N/A Melissa Vasequez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/School Operations Liason Member/P30/Parent Yvette Coit Member/P30/Staff Member 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NildaValdez Allison Wiggins N/A AlishaGilbert EricaWeiner Isabel Arias Kelly Reilly N/A Amy McClanahan Victoria Henriquez Bea Phol Member/P33/Parent Member/P33/Staff Member Member/P48 Member/P189/Parent Member/P189/Staff Member Member/P380/Parent Member/P380/Staff Member Member/M114 Member/I90/Parent Member/J117/Parent Member/J117/Staff member Miranda Rodriguez Member/PWHS/Parent Sandra Bullock Member/PWHS/Staff Member 2018-19 CEP 6  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 7  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 8  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 9  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide a learning environment that celebrates education, growth, and the differences of each and every student. An engaging and rigorous curriculum is offered, and is supported by highly specialized education services and instructional programs that serve our students with severe cognitive, physical, emotional, perceptual, social, auditory, speech and language disabilities. Staff is committed to providing learning experiences that nurture engagement, communication, and independence. Rich communication programs focused on integrating experiential learning in naturally occurring, authentic and meaningful “real world” settings are key to expanding our students’ capacity to achieve high standards of independence in school, at home, in the community and at work. We support 2018-19 CEP 10  individual student goals that enable each student to become an independent and responsible learner, and that provide opportunities to achieve their personal best. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P138M provides specialized educational and therapeutic services to a school wide population of 625 students. This number includes students with autism, students with significant cognitive, physical or behavioral disabilities, and students with multiple disabilities. Instruction is delivered to students in self-contained classrooms, Inclusion settings, and in three Auditory/Oral classes for students with cochlear implants. Our students’ ages now range from 3.9 years through 21 years. Our programs are located in nine (9) community sites throughout Manhattan. This includes a new site that has opened at P189. This site will focus on early childhood education, and includes a NYSED approved Pre-K. Approximately 93% of our students participate in alternate assessments. We envision our school as a partnership committed to providing quality education. Through strong home-to-school-to-community partnerships, the challenge to provide students with effective instruction aligned to the common core as well as the skills necessary to become life-long learners and participating citizens can be met. We are committed to creating programs that develop skills for independence, build self-esteem, and in-still a commitment to personal excellence. With the support of home and community partners we will continue to expand student options for participation in school, post school and the larger community. For students who have physical, cognitive, behavioral, and/or emotional disabilities, the ability to make choices and maintain control of one’s environment is not only a valued skilled, but is a priority. We believe every child, regardless of the severity of his or her disability can be taught efficient and effective ways of communicating and that development in all areas will be significantly enhanced when an appropriate system of communication is learned. Our instructional focus is to nurture independence and communication for engaged learning. In partnership with our general education colleagues and community organizations (e.g. Union Settlement), we will expand our resources for appropriate and meaningful inclusive instructional experiences. Currently, our student are included in general education classes at P30, P48, I90, J117 and Park West High School. For students participating in standardized assessment, Response to Intervention (RTI) supports is provided to those who require additional assistance to achieve high learning standards. Our broad strategy of person-centered planning and the educational implications of functional and alternate assessments drive the development of meaningful and appropriate individualized goals, objectives and instructional strategies for each student. This process is coordinated by P138M's Transition Coordinator, and is supported by the transition team. Students with fragile physiological conditions receive the required specialized medical services and personal care, as well as physical and assistive technology supports. Additionally, highly specialized social and psychological services are provided to students with challenging behaviors that seriously interfere with learning and socialization. Staff capacity to develop positive behavior support plans and to implement effective strategies and techniques will continue to increase through ongoing professional development in Positive Behavior Intervention and Support including Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI), Verbal Behavior, TEACCH, and Sensory Integration. Push-in/pull-out classroom instruction delivered by ENL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers provides supports to assist our English Language Learners in achieving greater functional and content language arts skills 2018-19 CEP 11  through experiential, meaningful learning experiences and the integration of technology. Currently, 199 students are receiving these services. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P138M serves students with severe cognitive, physical and/or medical, emotional, perceptual, social, auditory, speech and language disabilities. We provide instructional settings and supports for students with autism, students with significant cognitive delays, students with learning disabilities, students with multiple disabilities, and students with cochlear implants. Students with fragile physiological conditions receive specialized medical services and personal care, as well as physical and assistive technology supports. Additionally, students with challenging behaviors that seriously interfere with learning and socialization receive highly specialized social and psychological services. Underlying this comprehensive plan is the belief that our students with significant challenges must have access to the Next Gen Learning Standards. This is supported by instruction to clearly defined Essential Elements that are rigorous, but reasonable and achievable given appropriate opportunities to learn. High quality standards drive our instructional programs, and curriculum resources are structured to support the achievement of these standards. Ongoing, focused, collaborative professional development provides our educational teams with the skills necessary for the alignment of learning standards, curriculum, assessment, instruction, and resources. Skilled instructional teams, with the participation and contributions of family and community partners, maximize the potential for meaningful life outcomes for all students. Given a nurturing and engaging environment and the development of self-advocacy, communication, social, technological, civic, vocational and independent life skills, our students will increase their ability to be productive members of their communities. Our trans-disciplinary teams support the development and implementation of instruction that uses an integrated approach to provide support and related services, as well as positive behavior supports. The work of the team members underscores the importance of building committed partnerships with parents, families and community organizations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Goals: The school’s S/CEP goals and instructional focus have followed a data-based progression from year to year. Inherent to all goals is rigorous instruction designed to develop functional skills that will nurture increased engagement, independence and communication for all students. Central to all goals is that all students have A Choice and a Voice. School Strengths/Unique Features: Strengths identified at P138M's 2017-18 Quality Review included: Rigorous, coherent, and accessible curriculum and instruction that is aligned to learning standards Professional collaborations and inquiries (e.g. Verbal Behavior, Curriculum, PBIS) focused on improved student learning. · One teacher is a Board Certified Behavior Analyst who, in collaboration with a District 75 coach, supports the ongoing learning of their colleagues. Coaching has expanded to support the development of Verbal Behavior classes at three additional elementary sites in the P138M organization, and will be initiated at our new P189M site beginning in September. VB practices and the related in-depth data collection systems continue to increase. 2018-19 CEP 12  · Two administrators are certified TCI trainers. In addition to staff training, they provide ongoing support to the TCI Crisis and PBIS teams at each site. · P138 provides a full continuum of integrated supports beginning in pre-kindergarten and following each student through graduation to their post-school life. · Inquiry Teams (e.g. Verbal Behavior/ABA, Curriculum, PBIS) continue to cross-collaborate to support an integrated continuum of instruction from the Elementary to Middle to High School to Post School settings. The school’s strongly related S/CEP goals and instructional focus, and their data-based progression from year to year are a direct result of their Inquiry work. Common to all goals is the intent to increase functional skills that support the increased independence of each student. · P138M has completed a third year of the NYS PROMISE initiative. This is a five-year, federally funded research project aiming to increase employment services and opportunities to improve post-school outcomes for students. · An ongoing partnership with Adaptive Design channels additional funding to design and build adaptive equipment and furniture that enable our students to effectively access their learning environment. Students at our Park West High School are building on site, as well as training staff and students from other schools. The following Key Areas of Growth continue to be our Focus for the Coming Year: Verbal Behavior/ABLLS – VB Coaching support and teacher collaborations VB/ABLLS will continue to expand at four elementary sites, and will be initiated at our new P189 site beginning in September. Two classes will participate in a pilot program to promote skills for transitioning from independent work which requires self-regulation skills, to group work requiring higher order co-regulation skills. This provides the two cooperating teachers with opportunities to collaborate, in real time, to expand their skills for assessing students, collecting data, and teaching the transitional strategies and skills needed by their student to achieve greater independence. Curriculum (Alternate Assessment) - The implementation of consistent curriculum resources across all sites includes an expanded P138M Curriculum Framework of interdisciplinary units and monthly ELA units of study. The Frameworks are organized by grade bands: PreK-2; Grades 3-5; Grades 6-8; and High School. The units are supplemented by online resources that support the targeted instructional content. All classes have access to Unique Learning Systems, News2You, and A-Z Reading online supplementary instructional supports. Students in the elementary Verbal Behavior classes for students with autism follow the ABLLS curriculum which focuses on communication and skills for independence. Upon completion of the ABLLS continuum of skills, students move forward to the SRA Language for Learning and SRA Connecting Math Concepts curriculum programs that support verbal behavior strategies and practices. The number of classes implementing Equals Math will increase across sites and instructional programs, and will incorporate the newly updated Equals curriculum. Elementary 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classes as our P30 site will begin implementing the Fundations reading program, with the support of a D75 Coach and a Wilson Reading System trainer. Elementary 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classes at our P30 and P380 sites will begin to implement the Go Math program, making modifications as needed. 2018-19 CEP 13  The updated edition of the Meville to Weville language and communication program (including communication devices) was purchased for elementary 12:1:4 classes to support structured language and social studies content. instruction. Vocational Education at Park West HS - The instructional programs and school-based work settings provide a strong base for self-advocacy and vocational options. Students are provided with multiple and ongoing opportunities, both school and community-based, to learn and practice the vocational, social, and communication skills necessary to be independent and successful in the work force . As students’ skills for independence increase, so do the opportunities for community and vocational partnerships. Park West serves as a model for our high school classes at I90 and J117. Curriculum (Standard Assessment) -Three elementary standard assessment classes for students with auditory impairments and cochlear implants updated their curriculum with the latest edition of Go Math as well as the Teachers' College Reading and Writing Programs. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75M138 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 611 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.0% % Reduced Lunch 29.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 57.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 82.9% 0.3% 99.8% 30.4% 3.8% 0.7% 10 8% 6.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION P138M is committed to providing rigorous instruction that is customized, engaging, and connected to the Next Gen Learning Standards (NGLS), as well as the Essential Elements that are directly aligned with general education grade-level content and provide access for our students at a reduced depth, breadth, and level of complexity. The Essential Elements support instruction that is rigorous, but reasonable and achievable given appropriate opportunities to learn, as well as skills skills necessary for our students to become life-long learners and participating members of their communities. We are committed to creating integrated instructional programs that develop skills for communication and independence, build self-esteem, and instill a commitment to personal excellence. Central to all goals is that students will have A Choice and A Voice. Thoughtful instructional planning provides students with multiple, ongoing, and appropriate learning experiences that allow them to learn, practice and demonstrate essential thinking skills, behaviors and knowledge aligned to the NGLS and Essential Elements. Our broad strategy of person-centered planning, and the educational implications of both standardized and alternate assessments, drive the development of rigorous, meaningful and appropriate individualized goals and instructional strategies for each student. All students need clearly defined high standards that are reasonable and achievable, given appropriate opportunities to learn. Our mission for transitioning students along the continuum - from elementary to middle to high school to post-school settings - is to provide a consistent, results-oriented instructional process to move all students toward greater independence. Learning systems are being strengthened to increase students’ essential thinking skills and behaviors, as well as their functional application of academic knowledge, thereby facilitating their successful movement from school to post-school activities (e.g. voc ed, integrated and supported employment, adult services, community participation). To this end, rigorous instructional priorities must be set. In recent years, the work of several ongoing school-based Inquiry Teams (e.g. Transition, Verbal Behavior and PBIS) regularly pointed to a recurring list of essential skills that promote self-advocacy (e.g. choices, opinions, preferences) and independence. These include, but are not limited to: effective communication; use of environmental/informational text, self-regulation; community/ workplace/ recreational social skills; job-specific skills; effective work habits; self-advocating for needed supports; negotiating difficult situations; and mobility. Data from recent years indicates that students' overall performance is positively impacted by improved skills for self-regulation through informed choice making, and by the students' application of decision making/problem solving 2018-19 CEP 16  strategies to change conditions when needed/desired. The increasing ability to ask/answer questions supports these improvement of these skills. A 2017-18 CEP Goal for students in alternate assessment classes focused on increasing comprehension as demonstrated by accurately asking/answering questions. Students were taught these skills using informational text and language in the context of task performance. End-year SANDI data indicated an average increase of 6.4% in students’ accuracy and independence when asking/answering questions. (X classes increased performance by 10%; Z classes increased performance by 5%; V and Y classes increased performance by 8% and 7%, respectively.) In addition, Structured Classroom Workstation Skills data indicated that the independent completion of work increased as students used informational text more effectively as a source of answers to their questions, and as they initiated questions more frequently. Inquiries conducted during recent years revealed that socialization and academic participation increase when students' self-initiated communication and questioning skills increase. Additionally, these inquiries confirmed that problem solving and self-regulation skills are also positively impacted by improved self-initiated communication and questioning skills. (Note: Great importance must be placed on the consistent use of student-appropriate communication systems and strategies.) Questioning and discussion deepens student's understanding, helps students make connections between events or concepts, and helps them arrive at new understandings. During discussions, teachers must engage all students and practice strategies that promote language development as students increase skills for communicating their responses, ideas, and opinions. Teachers must also practice strategies, and provide feedback, that ensures students that their questions, responses, and contributions to conversations are valued. Instructional rigor is advanced as the independently asked/answered questions increase in number; the number of conversational exchanges increase; the social contexts/settings/applications become more varied; the pace and quality of exchanges increases; and/or the content, questions and discussions becomes more challenging. Administration will increase opportunities for teachers to collaboratively discuss, plan and increase capacity for the strategic use of techniques. Key instructional strategies will include: > Extended teacher questioning and student discussions. > Error-less learning with a focus on accuracy and independence. > “Wait time” practiced by staff, with respect for students' need for “think time” to increase accuracy and independence. > Varied and extensive opportunities to learn, practice, and apply skills/knowledge. We will also continue to build capacity for implementing the following instructional strategies that support student self-assessment and independence: > Ongoing checks by teacher for understanding, allowing for immediate adjustments to instruction. > Providing task-specific, actionable feedback to students that will deepen their understanding of the task/content. 2018-19 CEP 17  > Building self-evaluation skills that support student ownership of learning. With self-advocacy and independence as our priorities, Professional Development and Inquiry Team work promoting academic rigor will focus on:  Teaching essential thinking skills and behaviors that enable our students with significant intellectual disabilities to access the curriculum skills and knowledge, and to apply these in the context of ever expanding experiences and tasks related to different environments, social contexts and materials;  Building student communication skills for the effective use of functional, environmental, and content-based informational text to: perform tasks; participate in academic activities and discussions; problem solve; make informed choices, self manage behaviors; self-advocate; and socialize.  Building student behavioral skills/strategies that will increase their independence;  Creating experiences and tasks that are designed not only to elicit performances of academic content/skills, but also to apply knowledge/skills/behaviors to functional school/community/work experiences.  Planning sufficient and appropriate authentic opportunities for students to learn and practice skills;  Continuing the expansion of P138M’s Curriculum Frameworks to include additional examples of functional connections to the Next Gen Learning Standards and Essential Elements; and building capacity for implementing structured, consistent strategies for academic, functional and behavioral improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, students in elementary, middle and high school alternate assessment classes will demonstrate a 10% increase in the accuracy of independently asked/answered questions relevant to a task or discussion, as measured by monthly S/CEP goal assessments and SANDI item assessments, and when compared with Fall 2018 data. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Alignment with Danielson Component 3B: Using Questioning/ Discussion Techniques" Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Assistant Principals (APs) Weekly cohort team meetings to collaborate re teaching practices including: instructional activities for building questioning and discussion skills; assistive technology to support participation and performance. Assess performance and establish S/CEP /SANDI/IEP goal baselines. Monitor progress; analyze data; modify instruction/ materials/ student goals, as needed. Conduct Inquiries to identify instructional needs; to produce materials/protocols based on findings; to connect functional skills to the (Next Gen) Learning Standards and DLM Essential Elements; and to support skills for independent, self-initiated communication across the school continuum. 9/2018-6/2019 Teacher Teams Students Students Students Classroom Teachers 9/2018-11/2018 2018-19 CEP 19  Provide feedback to teachers re: their use of instructional strategies to promote questioning and discussions with their students. Plan and implement collaborative lessons (e.g. JARS) that teach questioning and discussion skills, including the use of assisted technology. Host Open House classroom visits to share and demonstrate strategies and materials to increase independent, self-initiated communication at home. Participate in inter-visitations, hosted by teachers identified as Highly Effective, to observe instructional strategies that promote questioning and discussions. Provide/attend professional development activities that address strategies for expanding students' questioning and discussion skills. Customize speech devices and communication systems to reflect content, and to support independent interactive communication. Design informational text-rich environments to support students when asking/ answering questions to interact, self-manage, and/or perform tasks. Teachers Teachers Students Classroom Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Inquiry Teams SchoolBased Coaches 11/2018-6/2019 Staff Developer Assistant Principals 9/2018-6/2019 Assistant Principals Class Teams Teacher Teams RelServ Providers 2018-19 CEP 20  Students/Families Teachers Teachers Students 9/2018-6/2019 ENL Teachers Class Teams RelServ Providers ENL Teachers Cluster Teachers Host Teachers Assistant Principals School Coaches Staff Developer Lead Teachers Assistant Principals 10/2018-6/2019 10/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers Speech Teachers 2018-19 CEP 21  Review Fall and Spring SANDI item performance reports. Review monthly SCEP goal data collection sheets. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students Teachers Speech Providers ENL Teachers Class Teams Speech Teachers ENL Teachers Cluster Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Adminstrators School Coaches Staff Developer 11/2018, 6/2019 12/2018-4/2019 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Workshops, as scheduled throughout the school year. Presented by Coaches, Lead Teachers, Speech Teachers, Staff Developer. (E.g. Meet and Greet; School Policies and Procedures; The Roles, Practices and Strategies of Related Service Providers; School-to-Post School Transition Services; ENL Services and Instructional Strategies; What's Next for Turning 5 Students; Understanding Your Child's IEP)  Classroom Open House Visits, as scheduled during the school year. Hosted by Classroom Teachers, Paras, and Speech Teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax Levy: To pay per session for Inquiry Team work  Tax levy: To pay for classroom coverage for staff attending PDs.  Tax Levy: To purchase CCLS-aligned resource and instructional materials.  Flexible Scheduling: To afford teachers collaborative time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, students in elementary, middle and high school alternate assessment classes will demonstrate a 5% increase in accuracy of independently asked/answered questions relevant to a task or discussion, as evidenced by S/CEP goal data, and SANDI assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  P138M Monthly S/CEP Goal data tool.  SANDI Assessment" Items/Slills: CD#30, CD#31, CD#33, CD#34, CD#35, CD#39, CD#43, CD#44, CD#46, CD#48, CD#50, and CD#51  Monthly IEP Goals Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT In order for students to engage with learning opportunities, their environment must provide order, be productive, and be respectful; expectations must be clear. Positive student behaviors are necessary if students are to be highly engaged in learning. To support high expectations for student behavior, P138M implements a school-wide positive behavior support (PBIS) system. This school-wide behavior support system is represented by the acronym CARS and is designed to promote and support Communication, Advocacy, Respect, and Safety. A matrix of meaningful/purposeful behavioral expectations appropriate to the wide spectrum of our students has been developed and tailored to the specific needs of students at each site. Each site posts the support matrix is posted on their PBIS display board, and classroom expectations are aligned to the matrix. Students are actively taught the social and emotional expectations with clear examples of what the behaviors look and sound like, and systems take on different appearances as they are differentiated to reflect the specific and diverse needs, interests and ages of our students. Examples include: Red/Yellow/Green Boards; Token Boards; First/Then Charts; PBIS Dollars; Point Sheets; PBIS event tickets. Teachers across the organization use their daily communications with parents to inform families of student progress on behavior. During the 2018-19 school year, the highly committed site representatives on the school-wide PBIS team will continue the work of building the site-based teams. The goal of the site-based teams is to build skills for creating and implementing individual student behavior intervention plans, as needed. This includes building skills for monitoring progress and analyzing data to guide the implementation and modification of behavior intervention plans on an ongoing basis. Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORs) data for 2017-18 remains consistent with the date of the previous year. School leaders analyzed the data mid-year and concluded that the the school was on target to reduce Level 3 and 4 incidents by 20%. However, in the second half of the year, one student accounted for 67% of the Level 4 incidents, and this negated the expected decrease in overall OORS incidents. During the WIEP process, twenty-seven students were identified as being responsible for weighted incidents. The school conducted a behavior needs assessment for each of these students, formed a behavior team at each site, and conducted Functional Behavior Assessments and Behavior Intervention Plans (FBAs/BIPs), where appropriate. Consistent behavior data was maintained for these students. At P138M we use TCIS as our model for addressing students’ challenging behaviors. This research-based program gives staff the tools they need to manage student crises, maintain safety and order, and teach new coping skills. TCIS is a highly structured program that requires staff to be trained over four full days. Two P138M administrators are certified TCIS trainers, and over the past several years, P138M built capacity by training nearly 100 P138M staff in TCIS. In June of 2018, one hundred and thirty-seven staff members attended a school-based PBIS workshop that included a TCI review. In July of 2018, two hundred twenty staff members participated in a TCI Conflict Resolution workshop. 2018-19 CEP 24  Ongoing throughout the year, P138M shares celebrations of student achievement with parents. Parents are invited to numerous school events, including dramatic and musical presentations, individual class plays, and parties to celebrate the students’ successes. Moving-up and graduation celebrations highlight student success in their course work and vocational programs. Research identifies self-regulation as one of the essential thinking skills/behaviors for students with significant disabilities. Our Inquiry, PBIS and anecdotal classroom data all indicate the continuing need to provide instructional opportunities during which students can develop the communication skills intrinsic to self-regulation – i.e. the ability to make informed choices, to apply decision making strategies (including questioning skills) to change conditions, to monitor/assess their own behavior, and to demonstrate behaviors that are safe, healthy, conducive to learning, and conducive to positive social interactions. Teachers will place greater emphasis on implementing strategies and creating systems that will enable students to take an active role in monitoring/communicating their own behavior, and to increase their on-task behaviors. It is anticipated that this, in turn, will result in improved academic performance. The end goal: to empower students with strong self-advocacy skills to maximize their independence, and increase academic successes. The school’s positive behavior support systems continue to support our mission to empower students with diverse and significant needs to recognize their full potential by providing them with education, life skills, values and a supportive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT By June 2019, the P138M positive behavior supports program (CARS), with an emphasis on clear student behavior expectations and student self-assessments, will be consistently implemented to increase students' positive behaviors, as evidenced by a 10% decrease in the number of behavior incidents and a 10% increase in on-task behavior related to students with Behavior Intervention Plans and IEP crisis paras, as reported on classroom reward and behavior data systems, OORS and VADIR. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Align with Danielson component 2d: Managing Student Behavior Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration . Site-based teams will be established. Site-based teams will meet to review behavior matrix and provide start-up information to new staff. Teachers and Site-Based PBIS Teams 9/2018-11/2018 Administration, School-based Crisis Intervention Trainers, Teachers Site Base Teams 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 ENL Teachers Classroom Tchrs PBIS School Advisory Team Materials to promote CARS are updated at each site; programs reviewed with/introduced to students. Students ENL strategies (e.g. PPR (pictures/symbols, language modeling, peer interaction) provide additional support for English language learners. Establish/maintain PBIS teams at each site; use Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) training information to increase skills for developing, implementing, and modifying Behavior Intervention Plans; increase for monitoring progress and analyzing /using behavior data to support PBIS programs. Students Site Based Teams Classroom Teams 2018-19 CEP 26  PBIS teams work with staff to develop/teach strategies and systems for students to monitor/self-assess their behavior. Classroom Instructional Teams 2/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 PBIS Advisory Team, Site-based Teams, School Counselors, ENL Teachers, and Administrators Staff participates in TCIS refresher workshops, making connections to independent communication. (A Choice and A Voice) Teachers Paras 11/18, 6/2019 School-based TCIS Trainers Consistent data collection systems/tools are used to capture targeted behaviors (eg. decrease negatives/increase positives, such as time on task). Behavior plans and behavior data are reviewed and analyzed at 10-week intervals. Behavior plans are developed or modified, as needed. Students participate in site-specific activities to celebrate and reward positive behavior. Parents are invited to participate in the celebrations. PBIS Advisory Team, PBIS Site-based Teams, Administrators Teachers PBIS Site Teams Administrators Classrm Teams PBIS Site Teams Teachers Paras 10/18-6/2019 11/18-6/2019 Students Parents Students Parents 2018-19 CEP 27 Behavior self-assessment systems/strategies are established for all students with Behavior Intervention Plans and IEP crisis management paras. Students with BIPs and IEP CPs 9/2018-6/2019 Classrm Teams PBIS Site Teams Data collection systems/tools are created for each student with a BIP and IEP crisis management para. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Monthly PTA Meeting/Parent Workshops - PBIS Team Members, Parent Coordinator, Administration  Daily Home-to-School communications - Classroom Teachers  Annual IEP Meeting - Interdisciplinary/Instructional Teams, Parents  Quarterly Report Cards and IEP Progress Reports - Interdisciplinary/Instructional Teams Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax Levy Allocations: To pr2018-19 CEP 28  ovide classroom coverage for staff attending professional de2018-19 CEP 29   velopment workshops. Flexible Scheduling: To provide common 2018-19 CEP 30  Prep/PD periods for teacher collaborations re: Behavior Plan2018-19 CEP 31  s, self-assessment systems; progress monitoring, and data re2018-19 CEP 32  view; to facilitate PBIS Team meetings; to facilitate staff pa2018-19 CEP 33  rticipation in TCI training.  Tax Levy Allocations: To purchas2018-19 CEP 34  e materials to support CARS positive behavior program and cele2018-19 CEP 35  brations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, >there will be a 5% decrease in the number of behavior incidents, relative to students with Behavior Intervention Plans, as reported in OORS; and/or a 5% increase in positive behaviors (e.g. time on-task) Additional indicators: > behavior self-assessment systems/strategies will be in place for all students with Behavior Intervention Plans and IEP crisis management paras. > data collection systems/tools will be in place for each student with a BIP and an IEP crisis management para >there will be evidence of Behavior Intervention Plans reviews/modifications, as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Administrative Behavior Intervention Plan Review Tracking Tool  Classroom behavior data; OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Describe the identified need that generated this goal. The needs assessment should encompass the entire school and be based on the performance of students, in relation to State academic content and student achievement standards. COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS P138M is committed to providing rigorous instruction that is customized to meet our students wide-ranging needs and aligned to the common core learning standards. We continue to collaborate to create integrated instructional programs that engage all students in the development of greater skills for independence and communication. Learning systems are being strengthened to increase students essential thinking skills and behaviors, as well as their functional application of academic knowledge. To this end, we will expand our Next Gen Learning Standards instructional connections using the DLM Essential Elements, and will provide additional professional develop to support the consistent implementation of curriculum resources across our sites. Recognizing that assessment in an integral part of instruction, we are strengthening teachers' skills for writing well-crafted IEP goals, monitoring student progress, and making instructional adjustments when needed. Additional training and ongoing supports were provided to staff to improve and increase progress monitoring systems for tracking students' movement towards IEP goal attainment. P138M administrators, unit teachers, coaches, and the staff developer participated in trainings re: Progress Monitoring and Data-Based Decisions, provided by D75 Coaches, administration, and the IEP coordinator. Training was turn-keyed to the Instructional Teams (classroom teachers, paras, cluster teachers, and related service providers) from all sites, on an ongoing basis. With these priorities in mind, teachers will collaborate to: Identify meaningful and measurable criteria;   Review and edit IEP goals to ensure that they clearly state the intended instructional priorities/targets.   Expand Next Gen Learning Standards connections, using the DLM Essential Elements resources;  Improve strategies for clearly and consistently communicating expectations to all students, and for providing ongoing and actionable feedback during instruction; Improve ongoing systems for monitoring student progress (e.g.strategic teaching/monitoring practices, data collection tools/systems); 2018-19 CEP 37   Improve self-monitoring systems/tools to ensure that they are appropriate for each student. Increase understanding of curriculum materials (e.g. ABBLS, Equals, Unique) and their progress monitoring components. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS By June 2019, teachers will collaborate to identify, modify, implement, and analyze progress monitoring of student performance to IEP goals, as evidenced by classroom IEP data and quarterly progress reports; and as evidenced by a 10% increase in the number of IEP goals demonstrating progress. 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Alignment with the Danielson Component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators Scheduled Cohort collaborations to review/edit IEP goals and criteria; to create/modify progress monitoring systems/tools; to review/analyze IEP goals data; to make data-based instructional decisions. Cluster teachers will collaborate with classroom teachers on a monthly basis. Scheduled cohort collaborations to improve staff strategies/systems/tools for providing more effective and meaningful feedback to students. Teachers Cluster Teachers Instructional teams customize speech devices and communication systems to support independent, interactive communication Teachers Administrators provide feedback to teachers about their instructional practices, and progress monitoring systems. Teams collaborate to plan/implement parent 10-Week meetings (re: students with BIP/FBA) to increase engagement of parents in Teachers Unit Teachers and Administrators 9/2018-6/2019 Unit Teachers and Administrators 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Unit Teachers and Administrators Unit Teachers and Administrators 2018-19 CEP 39  the IEP goal-setting process; to assist families in understanding the progress monitoring process. Speech Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators Staff attend D75 and/or school-based IEP Goals and Progress Monitoring workshops. Teachers Teachers participate in after-school IEP Review and IEP Training Activities Student Parents Teachers Related Service Providers 9/2018-6/2019 10/2018-6/2019 Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 12/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Continue rollout of DLM Essential Elements resources to expand Next Gen Learning Standards connections, and to design Teachers Instructional Teams Unit Teachers Administration Administrators Unit Teachers D75 Coaches IEP Coordinator IEP Coordinator Lead Unit Tchrs School Coach, Staff Developer 2018-19 CEP 40  instruction that provides access to the standards through multiple instructional entry points. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  An IEP Goals and Progress Monitoring workshop will be conducted for parents. (See Parent Engagement Action Plan)  Progress toward mastery of IEP goals will be shared with parents via quarterly Progress Reports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax Levy Allocations: To provide coverages for staff attending professional development workshops.   Tax Levy Allocations (including NYSTL funds): To purchase additional curriculum materials aligned with CCLS Flexible Scheduling: To provide common Prep/PD periods for teacher collaborations. to support structure and consistency across sites. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will implement progress monitoring systems/tools to measure student performance to IEP goals, as evidenced by November baseline data and February mid-year data; and by a 5% increase in the number of IEP goals demonstrating progress. . 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Classroom IEP Progress Monitoring systems/tools.  Midyear IEP progress data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP With the significant support of the Principal, P138M’s Verbal Behavior (VB) program for elementary classes for students with autism is in its sixth year of development at the main site/P30. Staff members assigned to the VB classrooms have been trained by Autism Coaches and Carbone Clinic personnel, and one teacher is a Board Certified Behavior Analyst. During 2017-2018, P138M continued to host model class inter-visitations for staff from within the school community. This was the second year during which administration allocated funding for a school-based Verbal Behavior Coach who, with the support of D75 Coach and a Carbone Clinic consultant, provides ongoing professional development and hands-on classroom support. Coaching was expanded to support the development of Verbal Behavior classes at P138M's three other elementary sites (P33, P48 and P380). As of September 2018, our new elementary site at P189M will be included in this progam. A review of the ABLLS data in the classes implementing the Verbal Behavior program indicates that students are making significant gains in communication accompanied by significant decreases in challenging behaviors. School Leaders are committed to supporting this initiative, as teachers continue to build capacity. As we continue to implement School Leadership's long-term plan to support our students with autism, phase two will focus on the transition of the elementary students in the verbal behavior classes to their middle schools. To this end we will strengthen and expand structured classroom strategies and protocols in those classroom. This requires effective communication, coordination of resources, professional development, team meetings, and the dissemination of promising practices related to this initiative. School Leaders' supervision of teachers' Structured Classroom teaching practices and ongoing collection and review of data, per the Coaches' recommendations, is essential to maintaining and expanding this program. Supported by funds budgeted by the Principal, classroom furnishings and materials that support Structured Classroom practices will be purchased. Additionally, per sessions funds will support professional development activities as teachers learn and increase their knowledge of best practices. Teacher schedules will be structured to provide instructional blocks suitable to structured classroom workstation rotations. Weekly cohort professional development periods will be provided for in site scheduling, so teachers have ongoing opportunities to collaborate and support each other in building their skills for implementing this initiative. Going forward, the curriculum team and teachers will unpack Essentials for Living, a curriculum based on Skinner's analysis of Verbal Behavior with a focus on functional skills and which has already been purchased, to plan for its effective future implementation in these classes. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with the support of school-budgeted funds and program scheduling designed to provide Structured Classroom cohorts with collaborative PD time, there will be evidence of physical structure, visual schedules, and a rotation mode of instruction in middle school 6:1:1 classrooms, as measured by an administrative checklist/rubric. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Purchase furnishings and materials to support the classroom set-up and implementations of Structured Classroom protocols. na Verbal Behavior Teachers 9/2018-10/2018 VB Coach, Staff Developer, Budget Coordinator and Administrators na na na Schedules will be developed to reflect instructional blocks for implementing Structured Classroom workstations and rotations, and for weekly collaborative planning PDs for participating teachers. Verbal Behavior Teachers 9/2018-11/2018 VB Coach, Coordinate professional development with the School-Based VB Coach and D75 Coach to ensure that staff new to the program learn and implement Verbal Behavior strategies/ protocols, and that continuing staff deepen their practices related to the Verbal Behavior program. New Verbal Behavior Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Unit Teachers, Administrators VB Coach, D75 Autism Coach, Administrators Unit Teachers, Administrators VB Coach Unit Teachers Staff Developer Administrators N/A N/A Support model demonstration classes and disseminate/promote opportunities for inter-visitations, following a structured inter-visitation protocol. Verbal Behavior Teachers N/A 9/2018-6/2019 N/A VB Coach, Provide opportunities during common PD periods and on professional development days for VB classroom staff and Structured Classroom staff to meet as a team to ensure coherence across elementary sites. Conduct monthly site-based walk-throughs to determine progress in the alignment of classes with the Structured Classroom Checklist. 9/2018-6/2019 Verbal Behavior Teachers 2018-19 CEP 45  Verbal Behavior Teachers VB Coach, Administrators 9/2018-6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  The Lead Teacher at each site, and classroom teachers will communicate with parents re: Structured Classroom strategies and student progress..  The Lead Teachers at each site will be the key person for additional follow up with parents.  APs will provide additional support and supervision to teachers. and will be an additional contact person for parents of students in Structured Classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax Levy Budget – To support the purchase of furnishing and materials to support Structured Classroom practices..  Tax Levy OTPS Allocations: To purchase additional assessment and instructional materials that support Structured Classroom strategies.  Tax Levy OTPS Allocations (including CIE funds): To provide class coverage for teachers and paraprofessionals  attending Structured Classroom training during school hours; to provide per-session payments for after-school Verbal Behavior professional development activities. Flexible Scheduling: To accommodate common, collaborative planning time for Structured Classroom teachers at each elementary site; for lead teachers to provide hands-on classroom supports to colleagues; for inter-visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the physical structure supporting Structured Classroom practices will be evident (.e.g. workstations, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 46  By February 2019, progress toward Structured Classroom set-up and establishment of protocols will be documented using monthly checklists. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Monthly review of Structured Classroom checklist. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRONG FAMILY AND COMMUNITY TIES There is a continued need to increase and vary outreach to parents. Efforts include expanding the avenues of communication with parents through the use of personal technology (e.g. accessing information via the school website, communicating through e-mail), and increasing the frequency of informational contacts. The School Leadership Team (SLT) will update the P138M Parent Survey. Requested and high-priority topics of interest will be addressed at meetings and workshops, and guest speakers included whenever possible. Typically, the level of parent/family involvement in PTA meetings, workshops and other school activities has increased only slightly, on a limited number of occasions. However, on a positive note: on May 19th, a total of 158 of our parents, students and their siblings attended the D75 Manhattan Parent Coordinator Family Day that was hosted at P138M’s main site. Reviews of attendance records of family subgroups continue to indicate that parents/families of students in the early grades are typically the most involved. Our Annual Parent Survey will be updated, and will be used to gather information re: preferred modes of communication, meeting dates/times/locations, and topics of interest. Previous feedback from parents, clearly indicated that flyers, letters and phone calls continue to be the preferred modes of the majority; requests for e-mails and information via school website were limited. The Annual Parent Survey will be updated to reflect recent trends and preferences expressed by parents/families during the past school year, and to gather information more effectively (e.g. linking PTA and SLT information). The new survey will be mailed or placed in student backpacks, or sent via email, as determined by parent preferences. To encourage the timely return of surveys, and to increase the number of parents/families participating in the process, a series of follow-up activities will be conducted. The more information we receive, the better we can meet the needs of our parents. Accommodating the scheduling needs of all parents continues to be a challenge. Meeting dates, times, and locations will be as fixed or as flexible as needed to provide parents throughout all sites with opportunities for increased participation. Looking forward, Skype and/or webcast possibilities will be explored. Also on the list of planned outreach strategies, the SLT will host a “town hall” meeting and publish flyers to encourage parents to become involved in the PTA and SLT, event calendars will be distributed and updated as needed. Both divergent and common parent interests and needs must be targeted. Monthly PTA meetings and Parent Workshops will continue to alternate between topics of interest, priority needs, and celebrations of success during which families gather together as a school community. In an ongoing effort to maintain the increased participation of parents taking part in the spring Learning Environment Survey, computers will again be available for parents at each site for the duration of that initiative, and technical assistance will be provided if needed. PTA and SLT news will be sent home periodically to keep all parents well informed, and feedback will be welcomed. To successfully expand and sustain positive life-long outcomes for our students, it is crucial that we continue to improve our outreach efforts and significantly increase parent/family involvement. In an effort to strengthen school-to-home connections that support increased engagement in student learning, a series of half-day, instructional 2018-19 CEP 48  workshops will be provided. These will include IEP, communication, positioning, therapeutic mealtime, Verbal Behavior, English as a New Language, CCLS connections, PBIS, and Transition workshops presented by lead teachers, related service providers, school counselors, ENL teachers, Transition Coordinator and guest presenters. Through these hands-on workshops, our goal is to actively engage parents in learning skills and strategies that will strengthen School-to-Home learning to further improve their children's positive outcomes. Specific outreach activities will conducted to register parents in these workshops. There will be a special focus on registering parents of students entering school for the first time, and those new to P138M, in an effort to form school and home partnerships that will support students from elementary school through post-school transitions. Additionally, the SLT will submit a Parent Engagement Proposal to Donors Choose. This grant would provide additional supports for this workshop initiative. Additionally, each class will host one Open House per semester. During these scheduled Open House days, Parents are invited to spend a hands-on morning in the classroom with their children. Parent/Family attendance data and parent workshop exit tickets will be reviewed by the SLT and administration, and then compared with Annual Parent Survey responses and requests, to determine if topical offerings and outreach efforts have been effective. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. STRONG FAMILY AND COMMUNITY TIES By June 2019, each class will host two Open House mornings (opportunities for parents spend a hands-on morning in the classroom with their children), as documented by an Open House scheduling calendar and parent attendance data. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide translated materials and translation services, as needed. Parents/Families 9/2018-6/2019 Advertise scheduled meetings, workshops, events and celebrations via fliers and School Messenger. Conduct extensive outreach to increase participation. Provide translated materials and translations services, as needed. Parents/Families Parents/Families Students Plan and conduct meetings, events and celebrations; schedule guest speakers/agencies in response to parents’ priority requests/preferences. Plan and conduct a series of hands-on, instructional workshops (sample topics: Meet and Greet: School Policies and Procedures; Medicaid Service Coordination; A Choice and A Voice: Communication for Independence and Positioning for Access to Learning; Practicing Skills at Home, English as a New Language, and School-to-Post School Transition Services) to engage parents/families as learning/teaching partners. Parents/Families Parents/Families 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 SLT Parent Coordinator Teachers Parent Coordinator SLT Parent Coordinator ENL Teachers Parent Coordinator SLT PTA Parent Coordinator ENL Teachers Rel Serv Providers 2018-19 CEP 50  Continue daily home-school communication systems. Parents/Families 9/2018-9/2018-6/2019 Classroom teachers, in consultation with cluster teachers and related service providers, will prepare quarterly Progress Reports to share student progress towards IEP goals mastery with parents/families. Each class will schedule, invite parents to, and host two Open House mornings (one per semester) as opportunities for parents spend a hands-on morning in the classroom with their children. Students Parent/Families Parents/Students In collaboration with PBIS site liasons, promote "Good News" phone calls/notes from staff to parents/families to share student successes. Conduct monthly PBIS celebrations rewarding positive student behaviors. Parents/Families Lead Teachers Administrators Teachers Teachers, PBIS Teams 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers PBIS Teams 10/2018-6/2019 Teachers Rel Serv Providers 11/2018-6/2019 Class Teams RelServ Providers Cluster Teachers ENL Teachers 12/2018-6/2019 Conduct an outreach campaign to increase Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators 2018-19 CEP 51 parent/family/student participation in the Learning Environment Survey. Unit Teachers Parent Coordinator SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PROMISE Grant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax Levy Allocations: To purchase workshop materials, Metro Cards, refreshments.  Tax Levy Allocations: To pay per session rate to paraprofessionals providing on-site after-school day care to parents attending meetings/workshops.  Translation Services Allocation: To pay per session rate to staff translating written materials, making phone calls, and providing translation services after school hours; to pay for translation services requested by parents/families (e.g. for IEP conferences, to accommodate esoteric languages). Flexible Scheduling: To schedule meetings/workshops during or after school in response to requested/preferred times and days of the week; to provide coverage for staff presenting at a meeting/workshop during school hours. Flexible Location: To provide appropriate meeting spaces and site locations in response to parent/family Survey requests/preferences.   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each class will host one Open House morning, as documented by an Open House scheduling calendar and parent attendance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent/family attendance rosters for instructional workshops.  Progress Report tracking tool.  Learning Environment Survey participation report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not meeting median scale scores based on grade level, will be identified and a careful analysis of their annual class portfolio, along with local assessment data, will then determine who will be targeted for AIS/ Mathematics All Students who are not meeting grade level standards are eligible. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) >Increase opportunities to practice the writing process. > Develop strategies for referencing text, and for using text-based evidence when responding to questions. > Model strategies for identifying the main idea, supporting details, and author's purpose. >Increase number/length or readings to increase stamina. >Model thought process/strategies for making inferences and predictions. >Prepare for tests using supplementary materials and practice strategies. >Model strategies for identifying/using key words to Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Classroom and Speech Teachers will provide: During the school day >small group instruction >one-to-one tutoring Classroom and Math Cluster Techers will provide: During the school day 2018-19 CEP 53  understand/problem solve. >small group instruction >Apply writing strategies to improve constructed responses. >Prepare for tests using supplementary materials; practice strategies. >Provide opportunities to interact with scient-ific materials/ tools. >Conduct invest-igations to increase observational skills. Use News2You online adapted newspaper and internet browser to supplement social studies instruction. Science Social Studies All Students who are not meeting grade level standards are eligible All Students who are not meeting grade level standards are eligible At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All Students who are not meeting grade level standards are eligible Create Social Stories to help students better understand social-emotional situations and issues. >one-to-one tutoring During the school day Classroom and Science Cluster Teachers will provide: >small group instruction. Classroom and Social Studies Cluster Teachers will provide: During the school day During the school day. >small group instruction. Guidance Counselor and School Psychologist will provide: Small group and one-to-one support activities. 2018-19 CEP 54  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Seventeen students are identified as Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 55  Resource cabinets were purchased for each site and stocked with items to meet the range of needs of our students in temporary housing. Items purchased include: instructional materials/supplies (e.g. notebooks, pencils, children's books/graphic novels, games, DVD players, backpacks, personal items (e.g. toothbrushes, toothpaste). 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $________ 2018-19 CEP 56  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 57  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 58  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 59  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 138, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 138 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 60  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 61  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 138, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 62  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 63  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 64  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 65  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 66  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III Afterschool and Saturday Program: "A Choice and a Voice" - Communication for Independence: The Title III After School and Saturday program, "Communication for Independence" will be conducted from 3:00pm to 5:00pm on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons at our I90 site, and from 9:00am to 12noon on Saturdays at the Main Site, respectively. The After School program will run for twelve weeks, excluding holidays, beginning the first week of February and ending the last week of May. One certified ENL teacher will provide supplementary instruction in English during the afterschool sessions, to students in grades 6 through 10 (service categories 12:1:1 and 6:1:1). The Saturday sessions will run for 14 weeks beginning the first week of February and ending the second week of June. Two certified ENL teachers will provide supplementary instruction in English to students in grades K-2 and grades 3-5 (service categories 6:1:1, and 8:1:1). We do not have full classes of each ratio attending either Saturday or Afterschool Title III sessions and, due to the impact of our students' wide range of disabilities, health issues and travel arrangements, the number of students able to attend varies from day to day and often results in low attendance on any given day. Additionally, students' disabilities often impact the length of time they are able to participate on a given day. As a result, instructional groups are typically small. The number of teachers is aligned to the students' IEP mandated student-to-staff ratios and the number of instructional groups, and adheres to the three-contiguous-grade rule as applicable during both our After School and Saturday sessions. Required staffing ratios will be maintained for all instructional groups as we have one ENL teacher and one paraprofessional who will provide services during the Afterschool sessions. If, at any time, students from both 12:1:1 and 6:1:1 ratio programs are combined, the number of students in that group will not exceed six. Staffing ratios will also be maintained during the Saturday sessions as we have two ENL teachers and two paraprofessionals who will provide services. Supervision of after-school sessions is provided by an assistant principal who is paid from a separate budget; supervision of Saturday sessions is provided by an assistant principal who is paid through the Title III budget. During the Saturday program, a group of elementary students in Grades K through 5 will participate, and a group of middle school students in Grades 6 through 10 will participate in the After School program. Students were identified based on the 2018 NYSESLAT scores and the NYSITELL scores for Kindergarten students who have not yet been administered the NYSESLAT. The participating students scored at the Entering level of language development. They have been diagnosed with autism, learning disabilities, or significant multiple developmental disabilities, and our focus is on improving their communication skills, as well as expanding their English language proficiency. We expect that student progress will positively impact their NYSESLAT scores. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Due to the nature and severity of our students' disabilities, expanded opportunities for meaningful instruction and social experiences are always desirable and beneficial. The After-School and Saturday programs provide time, focus and intense supports that positively impact student progress towards meeting the Essential Elements that are aligned to the Learning Standards, successfully achieving alternate grade level indicators, and demonstrating alternate performance tasks/skills. A priority instructional objective of our Title III program, “A Choice and a Voice" - Communication for Independence, is to increase student independence through the development of improved communication and self-advocacy skills. To this end, it is necessary to expand the English language proficiency and communication skills of our ELL students. Students use picture symbol communication systems; voice output devices, and picture symbol schedules developed specifically to meet the individual communication needs of each student. These individual systems support spontaneous, interactive and independent student participation in our Title III after-school and Saturday instructional activities. Additional supports include computer technology and software. Teachers and students use Mayer Johnson Boardmaker and Writing with Symbols software to create communication materials. Students also have access to classroom libraries, adapted books, instructional software, object cues, manipulatives and modified materials. A wide variety of differentiated materials and communication systems are developed by teachers to enhance hands-on experiential learning activities for students participating in the After School program. Commercial materials ( e.g. Mayer-Johnson Social Story Skills, ABLLS picture/word cards, A-Z Reading, SRA Language for Learners) are also used for instruction. Additional materials will be produced/purchased to further support best instructional practices. Instruction preparing students for participation in the Spring NYSESLAT assessment will also be implemented. The instructional program includes, but is not limited to: language development embedded across the content areas, hands-on experiential learning, structured and sequential work tasks, differentiated work sheets, and the creation of student portfolios. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Saturday Staff Professional Development Workshops Three Title III ENL teachers, and three paraprofessionals will participate in two Saturday professional development activities. The workshops will be co-facilitated by the ENL teachers. On these days, supervision is provided by an assistant principal who is paid from a separate budget. These professional development activities will be conducted on the second Saturday of the months of February and March from 8am to 12noon at the Main site (P30). These dates will not conflict with the Saturday instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part C: Professional Development The objective is to collaborate in the modeling of best practices for communication and language development, the sharing of current ENL strategies and methodologies, and in learning how to implement effective curriculum materials and activities incorporating those practices and strategies. During the first workshop, participating teachers and paraprofessionals will familiarize themselves with the Amplify Curriculum units, and review the A-Z Reading software and the Attanasio Get Ready for NYSESLAT materials. Program components, and strategies for implementing the programs, will be discussed and modeled. During the second workshop, participating staff will discuss and share strategies for building vocabulary and increasing collaborative student conversations (e.g. by increasing skills for asking/answering questions), including the use of augmentative communication devices to support student speech, as needed. The DLM Essential Elements aligned to these skills will be used to make instructional decisions that are appropriate for students performing at a range of linkage levels. Participants will also present and discuss modified/ adapted supplementary instructional materials that will be used to support the After-school instructional activities. This will include brainstorming ways to modify/adapt tabletop games that reinforce language/communication skills, as well as additional learning tasks such as those used in the school's Verbal Behavior program . Each participant will demonstrate adapted materials and model strategies that he/she has found to be successful in supporting the differentiated needs of the ELL students. Participants will also collaborate in the review of student work and/or performance data, provide collegial feedback, and discuss strategies for moving each student forward on the communication continuum. As a result of these professional development workshops, participating staff will be able to use and produce more effective supplementary differentiated materials, and to better implement curriculum materials and best practices to support our Title III Afterschool/Saturday instructional program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental Engagement The Title III letter, in English and the preferred languages of communication of the families, will be disseminated during the month of January via the US Postal Service and in students' backpacks. A special segment of our January parent meeting will be designated to address Title III supplemental program services. This orientation meeting will be conducted on the last Tuesday 2018-19 CEP 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities in January at P138M's Main Site at P30. It will be facilitated by two ENL teachers, including the lead ENL teacher, and will inform our ELL parents of programs available for their children, as well as scheduled workshop(s). School-generated written materials for families (including notices of orientation meeting, workshop(s) and Title III letter) are translated into students' home language by bilingual school staff members for timely dissemination. These materials are sent home in student backpacks and/or school-to-home notebooks. Follow-up phone calls are made by bilingual staff members who are also available to interpret information and discussions during the meeting(s) and workshop(s). A separate budget is in place to employ staff members to provide translation and interpretation services outside regular school hours, when needed. Saturday Parent/Student Workshop(s) The Saturday parent workshop will be conducted on the fourth Saturday in March from 9am to 12pm at the Main site (P30). This date will not conflict with the Saturday instructional program. Two ENL teachers, including the lead ENL teacher, will conduct this "hands-on" and interactive workshop for the ELL parents and their children who are designated as ELLs. Two Spanish speaking bilingual paraprofessionals, who work with the students during their regular school day, will assist to facilitate hands-on and interactive participation by students with their parents. An assistant principal, paid from a separate budget, will also be in attendance. The focus of the workshop will be Individualized Communication/Language Systems and School-to-Home Learning Activities. The objective is to demonstrate effective strategies/activities for parents to implement at home and in the community, and to assist parents in creating communication/ language materials for home. The students will be active participants, and parents will produce differentiated instructional materials to use at home with their children. A Share-and-Review of workshop highlights will be conducted among the Title III staff and parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem TOTAL: $18,490.16 A. Subtotal: $4,578.24 B. Subtotal: $10,676.82 C. Subtotal: $2,289.12 D. Subtotal: $572.28 E. Subtotal: $373.70 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. A. AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAM Teacher Per Session 1 ENL Teacher @ 2 days/wk x 2hrs/day x 12 wks = 48hrs @ 60.65 = $2911.20 Para Per Session 1 Para @ 2days/wk x 2hrs/day x 12wks = 48hrs @ 34.73 = $1667.04 ______________________________ B. SATURDAY PROGRAM Teacher Per Session 2 ENL Teachers @ 1 day/wk x 3hrs/day x 14wks = 84h @ 60.65 = $5094.60 Para Per Sesson 2018-19 CEP 71  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 Paras @ 1 day/wk x 3hrs x 14wks = 84hrs @ 34.73 = $2917.32 Supervisor Per Session 1 Supervisor (AP) @ 1 day/wk x 3hrs/day x 14wks = 42hrs @ 63.45 = $2664.90 ______________________________ C. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT Teacher Per Session to Conduct Workshops 3 ENL Teachers @ 4hrs/day x 2 workshops = 24hrs @ 60.65 = $1455.60 Para Per Session for PD Workshops 3 Paras @ 4hrs/day x 2 workshops = 24hrs @ 34.73 = $833.52 _______________________________ D. PARENT INVOLVEMENT Teacher and Para Per Session to Conduct Workshop 2 ENL Teachers @ 3hrs/day x 1 workshop = 6hrs @ 60.65 = $363.90 2 Paras @ 3hrs/day x 1 workshop = 6hrs @ 34.73 = $208.38 ____________________________ E. PAYROLL ENTRY Per Session 1 sec’y @ 10hrs @ 37.37 = $373.70 Not Applicable Purchased services  High quality TOTAL: $0 staff and curriculum development contracts.  Must be supplemental.  Additional  Must be Supplies and materials TOTAL: $4182.84 A. Subtotal =$4135.34 A. AFTER SCHOOL/SATURDAY PROGRAM > Amplify Curriculum Level K - $653. Level 1 - $842. Level 2 - $441. Level 3 - $448 Level 4 - $323. = $2707. > One iPad =$500. > Attanasio Getting Ready for NYSESLAT materials = $100. > Tabletop Games = $100. >16 pkgs printer ink (black/color) @$25 = $400. 2018-19 CEP 72 curricula, instructional materials. clearly listed. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. >6 rolls laminating plastic @$25 = $150. >6 rolls Velcro @$10 = $60. > Miscellaneous manipulatives = $50. > storage containers/zip lock bags (for manipulatives and individual task materials) = $68.34 _____________________________ B. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT N/A (See Amplify and Attanasio Getting Ready materials puchased for Afterschool/Saturday instructional programs.) ______________________________ C. PARENT INVOLVEMENT 1 pks printer ink (black/color) @25.00 = $25 1 box of laminating sheets @$12.50 = $12.50 1 roll Velcro @$10 = $10. Not Applicable A. PARENT INVOLVEMENT Refreshments for Parents attending Workshop = $60. $23,118.00. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL TOTAL: $0 TOTAL: $385. TOTAL: $60. $23,118.00 2018-19 CEP 73  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P138M Borough Manhattan School Number 138 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gregg Soulette Coach James Bhagwandin ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Susan Guzman/Melida Almeida Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Assistant Principal Michael Gaffney Coach Susana Castro School Counselor Parent Mirandy Rodriguez-Brown Parent Coordinator Revenya Murray Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Patrice O'Donnell, StaffDev C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 5 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 595 2018-19 CEP 74 Total number of ELLs 177 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.75%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 K 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 <-co 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? P138M supports a data driven program that connects instructional priorities to best practices that Bilingual and ESL teachers implement to maximize student progress. This includes the examination of assessment data, both formative and summative, that informs instructional decisions. To this end, teacher cohorts collaborate during common planning periods to analyze data, teacher cohorts meet with the coach and staff developer on an ongoing basis, and teachers participate in D75 and school-based professional development activities. The administrative cabinet meets quarterly to analyze data and determine next instructional steps. 2018-19 CEP 75  One hundred twenty-four ELL students participate in the SANDI/FAST alternate assessment, and forty-five ELL students participate in the ABLLS alternate assessment. Additionally, the NYSAA is also administered to those ELL students in Grades 3-8 and Grade 11 to gather additional data that is used to target priority skills, to develop measurable goals and objectives for improving student performance, to modify instruction as needed, and to measure progress. Six elementary ELLs are designated as standard assessment students and participate each Spring in the NYS standard assessments. Additionally, their teachers use Fountas and Pinnel and predictive Scantron assessments to identify instructional targets, as well as teacher designed tools and common core curriculum unit assessments to collect formative data reflecting student progress. Data gathered is used to develop specific, measurable goals, as well as the short-term objectives for improving student performance towards those goals. Data indicates that performance and progress of our ELL students is comparable to that of their non-ELL counterparts. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Quarterly reviews of data by ENL teachers, with a summary provided to administrators. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Program effectiveness will be evaluated by IEP Goal achievement, Spring 2017 NYSAA and NYS Test performance, SCEP Goals achievement, and demonstrated progress on the Spring 2017 SANDI and ABLLS assessments. Teacher designed skills checklists/data will be reviewed monthly. Additionally, ELL teachers will review the instructional materials used to determine their effectiveness, and to plan future selections. The effectiveness of the Title III Program, both format and content, will be evaluated by the ELL teachers and the administrative cabinet. Also, students' ability to perform the skills required to obtain a valid score on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT will be evaluated, as well as the resulting scores. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention process is a team-based strategy that requires the collaboration of all stakeholders who work with and support our ELL students. This includes the ENL teachers, classroom teachers and alternate placement paraprofessionals, speech teachers, the coach, the staff developer, and a parent 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The team works with administration to share, examine and interpret data. The specific needs of the ELL students are determined, the quality of instruction is discussed, and interventions are adapted and implemented, as needed. Student progress is monitored, as described in above sections, and data-based decisions are made to move students forward. IEP goals, as well as SANDI/FAST, ABLLS, NYSAA and SCANTRON assessment data, are reviewed periodically and target skills 2018-19 CEP 76  and instructional priorities are identified. The implication for the P138 Language Allocation Policy is that ELL students receive the number of units of ENL as required by CR Part 154. To insure that students meet the learning standards and alternate performance indicators, and pass the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the New Language Arts Progressions and incorporates ENL strategies. These strategies include cognitive academic language learning approach, total physical response, language experience, whole language, graphic organizers, assisted/augmentative language and cooperative learning to provide the instruction required to meet our students’ individual and varied needs. In response to both formal and informal assessment data, modifications to learning experiences/tasks and instructional strategies are ongoing in an effort to provide optimal differentiated instruction for all ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? According to the most recent NYSESLAT report, 92% percent of students tested scored at the Entering level and 8% scored at the Transitioning level. No students scored at he Emerging, Expanding and Commanding Levels. Due to the severity of their disabilities, the majority of our ELL students are unable to participate successfully in the standardized NYSESLAT test. They are unable to demonstrate the language skills required to fully participate in the assessment, and are unable to complete the entire test for a valid score. However, during instructional and experiential community based opportunities to learn, all students are demonstrating progress in targeted communication/speaking and listening skills. Students continue to require intensive remediation for their reading and writing skills. No single assessment provides a complete and accurate learning profile of our students with severe disabilities. Therefore it is especially important that we use a variety of tools, in addition to the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, to gather the many types of information needed for a more comprehensive understanding of their abilities and their learning challenges. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Monthly review with ENL teachers, facilitated by Lead ENL Teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. One hundred seventy-seven students (29.7% of total register) are identified as ELL students. Twenty-three bilingual students (13% of all ELLs) participate in special education monolingual classes and receive support from paraprofessionals who speak their native languages, as well as required ENL services, per their IEPs. One hundred fifty-two students (77% of all ELLs) are identified for ESL Only and receive required ENL services, per their IEPS. Five certified teachers provide Integrated and Stand Alone ENL instruction and work collaboratively with classroom teachers and alternate placement paraprofessionals across content areas to ensure that ELLs are receiving appropriate language instruction with an emphasis on ENL and ELA learning standards, NYS alternate grade level indicators and alternate performance indicators. They plan aligned instruction during common preparation periods. ENL services are provided to students identified as ESL Only, to bilingual students in alternate placement 2018-19 CEP 77  classes, and to former ELL students as recommended on their IEPs. As noted above, our four ESL teachers utilize the push-in model, but do implement the pull-out model when more appropriate. Our ELL students range in age from five to twenty-one, and are currently performing at the Entering or Transitional Levels of proficiency. Students are in self-contained classes with student-to-staff ratios as recommended per their IEPs: 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1 and 12:1:4. Additionally, some ELL students participate in Inclusion programs in general education classes. Instruction is provided, with required supports and accommodations, during regularly scheduled academic periods. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time, P138M does not have a TBE program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? AT this time, P138M does not have a DL program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELLs participate in self-contained, un-graded 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1, 12:1:4 classes and Inclusion classes across our eleven sites. ELLs receive the number of ENL instructional units as required by CR Part 154, based on students' grade and proficiency levels. Students receive both Integrated and Stand Alone ENL instruction, as provided by our NYS certified ENL teachers. ELA instruction is provided by NYS certified special education classroom teachers. At this time, we do not have a TBE program and, therefore, do not provide HLA instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Due to the nature of our students' disabilities, and in alignment with the Common Core Standards (CCS), math, science and social studies content is embedded within ENL/ELA instruction throughout the day. Functional and experiential learning experiences are provided so students have opportunities to attain skills and knowledge needed to access and connect to the Common Core Learning Standards. Alternate performance tasks and indicators of success provide access to the CCLS for our students with disabilities. ENL teachers plan collaboratively with classroom teachers to develop instructional activities that are differentiated for students' varying levels of language proficiency, as well as their significant disabilities. Communication systems and technology are incorporated to maximize student access to instruction, and to enhance instructional activities. Planning Reading Standard 1 for Literature ENL teachers. ENL teachers reference IEP goals, as well as SANDI/FAST, ABLLS or SCANTRON assessment data to identify priority target skills. In response to this data, ENL teachers align instruction with the following Common Core Learning Standards being addressed by classroom teachers: Reading Standard 1 for Informational Texts: Key Ideas and Details Reading Standard 1 for Literature Writing Standard 1: Writing to Support Preferences, Arguments, Claims Writing Standard 2: Writing to Inform, Explain Speaking and Listening Standard 1: Comprehension and Collaboration Language Standard 6: Vocabulary Acquisition and Use 2018-19 CEP 78  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers implement both formal (e.g. SANDI/FAST, ABLLS) and ongoing informal assessments (e.g. classroom checklists, performance observations) to determine students' home language literacy backgrounds and their language strengths and needs. Ongoing professional development of teachers' best instructional practices to target identified priority skills will ensure student progress toward English language literacy. While P138M does not have a bilingual classroom program at this time, alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak the students' home languages and bilingual related service providers offer daily support to bilingual students. They work closely with classroom teachers to evaluate students' skills in their home languages, and to assist students during ongoing instructional interventions. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Presently three students are identified as SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education). ENL teachers provide differentiated language instruction supports to these students. In addition to remedial ENL instruction and academic intervention services, social supports necessary to maximize continued achievement are provided. Identified SIFE students are mandated to receive the appropriate number of ENL instructional units per CR Part 154. Units of study are developed in partnership with the ENL and classroom teachers. Alternate assessments and teacher observations are used to identify target skills and plan appropriate instruction. Newcomer ELLs receive services per their IEP mandates. ENL teachers provide differentiated language instruction supports. In addition to remedial ENL instruction and academic intervention services, social supports necessary to maximize continued achievement are provided. Identified Newcomer students are mandated to receive the appropriate number of ENL instructional units per CR Part 154. Units of study are developed in partnership with the ENL and classroom teachers. Strategies such as Total Physical Response and small group instruction are implemented. Alternate assessments and teacher observations are used to identify target skills and plan appropriate instruction. Developing ELLs receive services per their IEP mandates. They are mandated to receive the appropriate number of ENL instructional units per CR Part 154. In addition to the services described above, a significant amount of technology is incorporated into the instructional activities of Developing ELLs. The provision of ELL services is extended for students who, due to their significant disabilities, require additional instructional time in order to access communication and language skills in the target language of English. Special education students identified for these extended services demonstrate language and communication skills, both academic and social, which are severely compromised by their disabilities. ELL students receiving extended services are supported by academic intervention services provided through individual and/or small group instruction, by adapted technology, and by assisted communication materials. They continue to require specialized instruction and academic intervention services to achieve their academic language goals. They receive extensive instructional accommodations and supports, including ENL Integrated and Stand Alone instructional strategies, to continue to build the communication and cognitive language skills needed to meet learning standards and alternate performance indicators. To this end, numerous material and a wide variety of strategies are employed. (These are described, in detail, in Part IV B of this document .) Once an ELL student tests at the Proficient level on the NYSESLAT assessment and transitions to a monolingual class, 90 minutes of Integrated ENL academic intervention services are provided for a period of two years to support that 2018-19 CEP 79  transition. The ENL teachers continue to monitor student progress, and to communicate with the ELL students, their parents, and their classroom teachers. Additionally, participation in the Title III After School Program is encouraged for all recently transitioned students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As is true for all P138M students, learning effective communication skills is key. Through meaningful and enjoyable learning experiences, students are developing everyday communication skills that facilitate learning. Teachers use strategies such as Total Physical Response to help students in the early stages of language development. Total Physical Response activities elicit whole-body responses to words; students learn by demonstrating behaviors related to everyday situations. Teachers may also use Picture-Walks which incorporate interactive, sensory, hands-on experiences with books. Students learn to use pictures, illustrations and other text features to assist and enhance their listening and reading experiences. As student skills increase, strategies such as Story Mapping are also employed. The use of graphic organizers assist our English language learners with comprehending, organizing, and remembering what they listen to and read. In turn, this also provides needed supports for speaking, re-telling, and writing about their reading and learning experiences. Cooperative Learning Experiences effectively promote learning, respect, and friendship among student peer groups. Increased peer interaction promotes English language development and the learning of concepts and content. Sheltered Instruction provides English language development, access to the core curriculum, and opportunities for social interactions and integration. Instruction is carefully planned to be more meaningful and understandable for our ELL learners. This includes speaking carefully and clearly, repeating key learning points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with nonverbal communication cues such as pictures, objects, gestures, and graphic illustrations. These strategies, along with increased opportunities for social interactions, promotes deeper understanding and retention of learned skills/behaviors. All classroom libraries include a variety of multi-leveled books and reflect the background, needs and strengths of the ELL student. All classrooms also offer print rich environments that include personal communication/ word systems and, when appropriate, word walls. Students use picture symbol communication systems; voice output devices, and picture symbol schedules that are developed specifically to meet the individual communication needs of each student. These individual systems support greater independence and increase participation in instructional activities. Additional supports include computer software, books on tape and music CDs. Teachers and students use Mayer Johnson Boardmaker and Writing with Symbols software to create individualized communication materials. Students also have access to adapted books, big books, science resource kits, Unique Learning System social studies materials, and a wide variety of web-based instructional materials. Object cues, manipulatives and modified materials further support interactive, hands-on instruction. Essential thinking skills and behaviors, as well as instructional content, are taught using a wide scope of materials, programs, curriculum and strategies including, but not limited to: Picture Exchange Communication Systems (PECS), Social Stories, ABA/Verbal Behaviors, Get Ready to Learn, SMILE, Handwriting Without Tears, Meville to Weville, UNIQUE Learning System, Words their Way, Reading Street, Write Source, Math Steps, and Touch Math materials. Incorporating technology – eg. SmartBoards and iPads - further enhance instruction and provides highly motivating, interactive learning experiences. Due to the nature of our students' significant disabilities, and in alignment with the Common Core Standards, language instruction is embedded across all content areas. The use of early emergent text is necessary for all of our students with significant intellectual disabilities. However, the content, topics and type of text must be appropriate to their age. The process of acquiring, developing and improving instructional activities and materials that are not only age and grade appropriate, but also functional and meaningful for our students with severe disabilities, is an ongoing effort. 2018-19 CEP 80  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Effective instruction for English language acquisition is the result of focused collaboration between all members of the instructional team - classroom teachers, alternate placement paraprofessionals, content area cluster teachers, ESL teachers and related service providers. The thoughtful development of daily schedules, units of study, curriculum maps and scaffolding strategies aid the development of a strong functional and academic language curriculum. These supports enable student to achieve their IEP goals, and increase their English language proficiency. All students are placed in the least restrictive environment based on their IEP recommendations, and ELL students receive ENL services as part of their IEP mandates. Bilingual students participate in monolingual classes, supported throughout the day by paras who speak their home languages. Five ENL teachers provide services to ELL students throughout our 11 sites. To accomplish this, ENL teachers are assigned to multiple sites. Their schedules are carefully managed to maximize instructional time for delivering ENL services to 175 students. ELL students are group by proficiency levels, allowing ENL teachers to provide focused instruction. To the extent possible, flexible programming is used to maximize the time our students spend with their non-disabled peers. Students in inclusion spend the day in general education classes with their non-disabled peers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our Title III after school program provides supplemental language development supports in ELA and math to address those deficits indicated by performance assessments. Attending students have the opportunity to receive direct instruction individually and in small groups of two or three. Bilingual students receive instruction in Spanish. Recommended instructional ratios are maintained for each small instructional group. This specific and targeted instruction effectively addresses each student’s individual communication and language needs. Due to the nature and severity of our students’ disabilities, expanded opportunities for meaningful instructional and social experiences are always desirable and beneficial. The supplementary instructional time reinforces instruction and provides additional opportunities for students to actively participate in learning during both individual and small group activities. The after school program provides additional time, instructional focus and intense supports that positively impact student progress towards meeting ELL and Common Core learning standards, successfully achieving alternate grade level indicators, and demonstrating alternate performance tasks/skills. Targeted intervention in ELA, math, science and social studies is also provided by cluster teachers to our students designated for ESL Only. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, no new programs are planned. School day instructional ENL programs and the supplemental Title III After School program will continue. There will be a concerted effort to increase the number of students participating in the Title III After School program, as well as the number of parents attending the Saturday workshop. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. No programs/services for ELL students are being discontinued. 2018-19 CEP 81  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students are provided equal access to all P138M programs. The primary objective for all P138M students, across all instructional models, is to increase students' independence and prepare them to be involved participants in their post school lives. To this end, it is necessary to expand the English language proficiency and communication skills of our ELL students. Students will use individualized communication systems (e.g. picture symbols, voice output devices) developed specifically to meet their individual communication needs. These individual systems support spontaneous, interactive and independent student participation at school, and beyond. Access through communication is also supported through the use of computer technology and software. Students also have access to classroom libraries, adapted books, object cues, manipulatives and modified materials that support learning. A wide variety of differentiated materials are developed by teachers to enhance hands-on experiential learning activities. Instruction preparing students for participation in the Spring NYSESLAT assessment is provided to improve their assessment outcomes. A Title III after-school program provides supplemental language development supports. Attending students have the opportunity to receive direct instruction individually and in small groups. Recommended instructional ratios are maintained for each small instructional group. This specific and targeted instruction effectively addresses each student’s individual communication and language needs. Due to the nature and severity of our students’ disabilities, expanded opportunities for meaningful instructional and social experiences are always desirable and beneficial. The supplementary instructional time reinforces instruction and provides additional opportunities for students to actively participate in learning during both individual and small group activities. The after-school program provides additional time, instructional focus and intense supports that positively impact student progress towards meeting ELL and Common Core learning standards, successfully achieving alternate grade level indicators, and demonstrating alternate performance tasks/skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Classroom libraries include a variety of multi-leveled books and reflect the background, needs and strengths of the ELL students. Classrooms offer print rich environments that include personal communication/word systems and, when appropriate, word walls. Students use picture symbol communication systems; voice output devices, and picture symbol schedules that are developed specifically to meet the individual communication needs of each student. These individual systems support greater independence and increase participation in instructional activities. Additional supports include SmartBoards, iPads, computers and computer software, video DVDs and music CDs. SmartBoards and iPads enable student to participate in highly motivating, interactive learning experiences. Teachers and students use Mayer Johnson Boardmaker software to create individualized communication materials. Students also have access to adapted books, big books, science resource kits, Unique Learning System social studies materials, and a wide variety of web based instructional materials. Object cues, manipulatives and modified materials further support interactive, hands-on instruction. Essential thinking skills and behaviors, as well as instructional content, are taught using a wide scope of materials, programs, curriculum and strategies including, but not limited to: Picture Exchange Communication Systems (PECS), Social Stories, ABA/Verbal Behaviors, Get Ready to Learn, SMILE, Equals Math, Handwriting Without Tears, Meville to Weville, UNIQUE Learning System, Attainment Common Core Solutions, and Math Steps materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 82  At this time, P138M does not have TBE or DL programs. However, each bilingual student is placed in a monolingual class with the support of an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the student's home language, as well as ENL services. P138M respects each ELL student's home language and culture, and supports school and community-based multicultural experiences. Home language literacy prepares students with skills and strategies that will transfer to English language learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? English Language Learners receive recommended services and resources a per their IEP. ELLs are continuously evaluated to ensure that the level of support services they are receiving is appropriate for their needs. Due to the nature of our students' significant disabilities, and in alignment with the Common Core Standards, language instruction is embedded across all content areas. The use of early emergent text is necessary for all of our students with significant intellectual disabilities. However, the content, topics and type of text must be appropriate to their age. Instructional activities, materials and settings should provide students with opportunities to experience content and activities similar to those experienced by their non-disables peers. The process of acquiring, developing and improving instructional activities and materials that are not only age and grade appropriate, but also functional and meaningful for our students with significant disabilities, is an ongoing effort. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Classroom libraries include a variety of multi-leveled books and reflect the background, needs and strengths of the ELL students. Classrooms offer print rich environments that include personal communication/word systems and, when appropriate, word walls. Students use picture symbol communication systems; voice output devices, and picture symbol schedules that are developed specifically to meet the individual communication needs of each student. These individual systems support greater independence and increase participation in instructional activities. Additional supports include SmartBoards, iPads, computers and computer software, video DVDs and music CDs. SmartBoards and iPads enable student to participate in highly motivating, interactive learning experiences. Teachers and students use Mayer Johnson Boardmaker software to create individualized communication materials. Students also have access to adapted books, big books, science resource kits, Unique Learning System social studies materials, and a wide variety of web based instructional materials. Object cues, manipulatives and modified materials further support interactive, hands-on instruction. Essential thinking skills and behaviors, as well as instructional content, are taught using a wide scope of materials, programs, curriculum and strategies including, but not limited to: Picture Exchange Communication Systems (PECS), Social Stories, ABA/Verbal Behaviors, Get Ready to Learn, SMILE, Equals Math, Handwriting Without Tears, Meville to Weville, UNIQUE Learning System, Attainment Common COre Solutions, and Math Steps materials. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The ENL teachers, alternate placement class teachers, and speech teachers collaborate to evaluate each newly enrolled ELL 2018-19 CEP 83  student, to develop appropriate instructional goals, and to formulate an instructional plan to meet the instructional needs of each newly enrolled ELL student. An ELL orientation meeting provides an opportunity for parents and staff to share important information that will contribute to the development of effective and comprehensive instructional programs for new ELL students. Newly enrolled students and their parents are encouraged to participate in our Title III After School/Saturday instructional program and Saturday parent workshops described previously in this document. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, P138M does not offer language electives. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At this time, P138M does not have a dual language program. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The academic professional development plan for P138M addresses a variety of issues and topics pertaining to the education of our ELL students. School based professional development provided on November, June and July professional development days, and during Title III Saturday workshops, provides opportunities for instructional teams to expand their knowledge and skills related to the new Common Core Learning Standards and the connection of the standards to embedded learning across all content areas, NYS ELL Learning Standards, Functional Learning Tasks/Experiences and Alternate Performance Indicators; ENL Instructional Strategies; and Modifying Instructional Methods and Materials for ELLs. Prior to the Spring assessment period, the lead ENL teacher turnkeys NYSESLAT training for her cohorts. Additionally, the ENL teachers, with the support of the school based coach and staff developer, meet quarterly during common professional development periods to collaborate on strategies for implementing the P138M curriculum frameworks through balanced literacy, ESL through content areas, and technology in ESL education. The school based coach is available to provide ongoing instructional supports and to recommend core curriculum content materials, as needed. P138M’s teachers and paraprofessionals who serve ELL students also benefit from the ongoing services provided by the District 75 ELL coaches. In addition, P138M ensures the ongoing attendance of ENL monolingual teachers and alternate 2018-19 CEP 84  placement paraprofessionals at district and city level workshops and conferences that strengthen the language instruction of their ELL students. These workshops include, but are not limited to: The ELL Institute; Jose P Training; Picture Exchange Communication Systems (PECS); Social Stories; Powerpoint Adapted Books; SMILE Reading Program; ABA/Verbal Behavior; Assisted Communication, and Integrating the SmartBoard and iPad for interactive learning. A full day workshop is provided at our main site on Professional Development Days (November/June/July) for alternate placement paraprofessionals providing native language supports to our ELL students. Conducted by our ESL teachers, these workshops address ELL strategies and best practices, and provide an opportunity for participants to develop differentiated instructional materials. A log is maintained reflecting staff attendance at all professional development workshops/trainings. School-based and D75 professional development activities provide opportunities for instructional teams to expand their knowledge and skills related to the new Common Core Learning Standards, Common Core Connections to Cross-Content Embedded Learning, NYS ELL Learning Standards, Functional Learning Tasks/Experiences, and Common Core Alternate Performance Indicators. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers works closely with the middle and high school unit and classroom teachers, as well as the transition coordinator and guidance counselor to support students and their parents students during the transition from elementary to middle school, middle school to high school, and high school to work settings. On an ongoing basis our Transition Inquiry Team collaborates to create a framework that identifies priority skills, knowledge and behaviors that will support students through these transitions, and to better prepare students for the expectations of their new instructional settings. Site visits provide parents and students with an opportunity to become more familiar with new settings and staff. When appropriate, teachers may use social stories and discussions to help students prepare for transitions. P138M facilitates participation in school and district-based workshops to ensures that staff meet the PD requirements of CR Part 154: All teachers (15% of total PD hours); ENL teachers (50% of all PD hours). To accomplish this, teachers are encouraged to attend D75 and DOE professional development activities (e.g. Jose P Compliance, ELL Strategies). They also consult with the District 75 ELL coaches and director regarding issues of compliance and instruction. School-based professional development activities include workshops that address the instruction of ELLs (e.g. language acquisition, co-teaching strategies, common core connections). The school-based coach and staff developer provide additional supports to teachers and paraprofessionals. All documents regarding Jose P Compliance are maintained in a P138M ELL Compliance Binder. All records of staff participation in professional development activities are maintained in the P138M staff development office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to Parent/Teacher conference, IEP meetings and orientations, P138M ensures that ENL teachers meet with ELL parents at least once a year to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents are provided with interpreters in their home language. Communication and parent involvement are encouraged and supported by the Family Coordinator and the ENL 2018-19 CEP 85  teachers. Parents who may require written translation and oral interpretation services are initially identified by a review of: ATS Home Language, POB/Lang/Geo (RPB) and ELL reports; and a review of IEPs indicating parents’ preferred language. Specific details of individual translation and interpretation needs are ascertained by review of information provided in the Annual Parents Interests/Needs Survey. Written translation and/or oral interpretation services for parents ensure a full understanding of the educational process for their children and a timely awareness of other pertinent information relating to the school community. Documents and forms in parents home languages are distributed and used when appropriate (ex. DOE publications, IEP forms),and school generated written materials for families are translated in a timely manner by school staff members and sent to all households simultaneously. School staff members translate parents’ written communications to the school. Bilingual school staff members are available to interpret information and discussions during all meetings, phone calls, events and IEP conferences conducted during school hours and a budget is in place to employ staff to provide these services during after school hours when needed. The NYCDOE Translation/Interpretation Unit is contacted for assistance in the event that we are unable to provide esoteric language services. Parents are notified, in writing, of the availability of translation and interpretation services and information on how to obtain these services is included. The Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services is posted at all school sites. Additionally, the Parents’ Bill of Rights and Options for our ELL special education students are discussed with their parents during IEP and Educational Planning Conferences. Through the school’s Parent Coordinator, ENL teachers and bilingual teachers, P138M offers ongoing information and translation services in the identified home languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teachers maintain ongoing communication with parents of ELLs. Information is shared in their home languages, and opportunities are provided for parents to share concerns, communicate needs, and participate in orientations, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Association Meetings, Annual ELL Meetings and workshops. Workshops will be provided to encourage effective parental participation in school and home activities, to support the acquisition of literacy skills assessment performance, and to promote achievement of goals. 2018-19 CEP 86 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, N/A , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 87  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Gregg Soulette School DBN: P138M Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 75M138 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 N/A 6/28/17 Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Patrice O'Donnell Other Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Gregg Soulette MichaelGaffney Revenya Murray Susan Guzman/ENL Mirandy Rodriguez Brown Melida Almeida, ENL N/A James Bhagwandin Susana Castro N/A N/A Staff Developer 2018-19 CEP 88  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75M138 School Name: P138M Superintendent: Gary He The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Susan Guzman Lead ENL TEacher TBD Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents who may require home language interpretation services, including written translation and oral interpretation services, are initially identified by a review of: ATS Home Language Interpretation Survey/Part 3; ATS POB/Lang/Geo (RPB) and ELL reports; Emergency Contact cards, and a review of IEPs indicating parents’ preferred language. P138M's Annual Parent Interests/Needs Survey, developed by the School Leadership Team and the Parent Coordinator, is translated to meet the anticipated home language needs of the parents of our ELL students. Specific details of parents' individual translation and interpretation needs are ascertained during a review of the information provided in the Surveys completed and returned by the parents. 2018-19 CEP 89  As needed, P138M hires bilingual staff members to provide interpreter/translator services for parent meetings, parent outreach, and written documents. Appropriate signage is prominently displayed, informing visiting parents of translation services that are available. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 100% 100% TBD TBD The parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication include: English, Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, Russian, Bengali, Haitian, French, Japanese, and Greek. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents to be translated include: calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements (Fall/Spring), after-school program information (Fall), New York State testing dates (Spring), holidays and Ongoing 9/2017 - 6/2018 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P138M utilizes staff to translate written correspondence to parents in the home languages of Spanish and Chinese. However, the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit are required for the translation 2018-19 CEP 90  school closing announcements (as needed), letters from school administrators/classroom teachers/school nurses, PTA announcements, and notices of special events (workshops, student performances, etc.) Most translated documents are distributed to parents one or two weeks prior to the meeting/event. of documents in esoteric home languages. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face-to-face meetings include: Annual IEP meetings, Fall/Spring Parent-Teacher conferences, and ELL Orientation and Annual meetings. Fall 2017 Informal interactions include: administrator, classroom teacher, attendance teacher, school nurse and guidance counselor outreach phone calls to parents, These take place as needed. interpretation service(s)? The bilingual Pupil Accounting Secretary, bilingual teachers, and/or bilingual paraprofessionals who speak the parents' preferred language, will provide interpretation services and translated written materials. In the case of esoteric languages not spoken by any staff member, the school will reach out to the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Emergency contact cards are updated and kept on file at each site. Back-up emergency contact numbers are included. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 91  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information will be distributed to all staff in print and via email. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulations A-663 are fulfilled as follows: Parents are notified in writing, in home languages, of the availability of translation and interpretation services. Information on how to obtain these services is included. The "Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services" is posted at all school sites. The NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted for assistance in the event that there is as need for esoteric language services that we are unable to provide using in-house staff members. The "Parents' Bill of Rights" and "Safety Plan Procedures" are sent to all parents in their home languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents will be gathered using Annual SLT Parent Surveys (in home languages) that address parent preferences, interests, and needs, as well as the quality of services offered. Checklist evaluations (in home languages) will be completed following parent meetings and/or workshops to provide planning information going forward. 2018-19 CEP 92 
