2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M139 School Name: STEPHEN T. MATHER BUILDING ARTS & CRAFTSMANSHIP HIGH SCHOOL Principal: LARRY GABBARD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Stephen T. Mather Building Arts & Craftsmanship HS (Mather HS) 310200011139 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M139 439 West 49 th Street, 4 th Floor, NYC, NY 10019 212-399-3520 212-245-4669 Phone Number: Fax: Paul Kelly PKelly5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Larry D. Gabbard Ivette Dobarages OttoStarzman Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Co-Chairs Emily Williams & Otto Starzman SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Clarissa Fuller KiaraGomez Frances John Matt Jacobs, NPS Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, Room 708, NY, NY FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3739 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) AffinityCUNY/UA Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St, Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Larry D. Gabbard IvetteDobarganes OttoStarzman Clarissa Fuller Frances John KiaraGomez Patti Reily,NPS Michaela Berg Harris Mintz David Schildkraut *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative - NPS Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Emily Williams Maheen Zaheer Beth Foresta Chad Hudson Sharice Burgess Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented CO-PRESIDENT/ Teacher Student Representative(optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Parent Member/Business Manager Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Stephen T. Mather Building Arts & Craftsmanship High School, through hands-on/minds-on learning opportunities and skills-training, provide all learners with access and exposure to the fields of building arts & craftsmanship through experiential and engaging learning opportunities that motivate and inspire, leading to each student's readiness for post-secondary education and a range of career opportunities in historic preservation leadership. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Stephen T. Mather Building Arts & Craftsmanship High school is a Career and Technical Education (CTE) school that offers its students hands-on skills-training in the specialized building arts and landscape trades, focused on high-quality craftsmanship and historic preservation. Mather HS's founding partner, the National Park Service (NPS)—which is committed to protecting the nation's national parks, monuments, cultural and historic sites including the Statue of Liberty & Ellis Island—has an active role in the daily operations of the school by continually working to develop the CTE curriculum, offering regular access to work-based learning sites, arranging jobs and internships for students, and by providing NPS employees to demonstrate for and train our students in the skills required by the historic preservation field. In conjunction with the CTE program, the rigorous Regent’s curriculum offered at Mather HS prepares our students to be both career and college ready upon graduation. The Regents curriculum offered to students is guided by Mather HS's four (4) core instructional principals, which include CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) mastery-based instruction and learning, project-based hands-on learning, a cohesive emphasis on building student writing and literacy skills, and social/emotional learning through Packvisory. The implementation of project-based hands-on learning across grade levels and content areas allows Mather students the opportunity to become actively engaged in course skills and content by completing interactive assignments that demonstrate mastery of CCLS. To develop and strengthen our students’ literacy skills, Mather HS utilizes Judith Hochman's writing system titled, The Writing Revolution (TWR), which provides targeted literacy instruction to both increase student reading comprehension, and strengthen writing organizational skills. Our belief in CCLS mastery-based learning and instruction provides Mather students with both a clear understanding of their academic strengths and areas of development, and the ability to clearly vocalize their academic progress to others. The Mather HS culture is rooted in and driven by the Five (5) Mather Core Values, which include awareness, collaboration, responsibility, positive risk taking, and being action oriented. These five (5) core values and other social-emotional skills are continually nurtured and reinforced by the Mather HS advisory program. Assigned to an advisory group (Packvisory) as incoming ninth graders, Mather students remain with their specific advisory group for four years as they move through the full four-year advisory curriculum. Although advisory teachers (pack leaders) are rotated each year, the stability of the student advisory groups allow for the formation of a group culture built on foundation of trust and support and driven by the five (5) Mather Core Values. Mather HS strives to redefine Career and Technical Education (CTE) for the 21st Century. Through our unique partnership with the NPS, and myriad other partners, we are able to offer real, hands-on education in the building and landscaping trades, with emphases on high-quality craftsmanship and the specialized building arts, while also providing our students with a solid college- and career-ready foundation integrated with the trades and aligned with the Common Core Standards. In our model, students are no longer being asked to choose one “track” over the other, but are instead, learning and preparing for both, opening more doors and making them more competitive in the labor force. Through the NPS partnership, our students will benefit from the expertise of NPS’ commitment to preserving natural and cultural resources. The fields of preservation, conservation and restoration require workers who understand the shared basic philosophy underlying these disciplines and the necessary skills these professions entail. As a result, our students receive a foundation in preservation methodology, including thorough research, detailed documentation, insightful interpretation and effective communication, all of which support our students’ transition to college or to employment opportunities associated with these trades. Equally important and happening concurrently, our students work directly in the trades of carpentry, masonry/plastering, decorative finishes and landscape management. By doing so, they not only gain the introductory skills that could allow for immediate employment after high school, but they also have an advantage over others who are seeking apprenticeships or positions in order to further hone their skills in the building and landscaping trades, especially those targeting preservation and historic restoration. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Mather Student Body Data:  We have approximately 420 students on roster for the 2018-2019  83% are economically disadvantaged. In order to support our economically disadvantaged students, in addition to providing economic assistance where possible (in the form of food, clothing, toiletries, personal needs) Mather HS employee three social workers to help these address the socio-economic challenges a associated with being economically disadvantaged.  7% are ENL. These ENL students need targeted instruction and support to support and strengthen their English language skills.  62% identify as Hispanic, 26% Black or African American, 7% White, 4% Asian, 3% Other  Twenty-eight percent (28%) of our students have IEPs. These students with IEPs need both the specific academic and social support identified in their IEPs in order to meet their unique and varied needs. Because we serve 28% special education, we staff eight special education teachers, seven paraprofessionals, one IEP teacher and three social workers. We pay very close attention to our special education pupils and as a result, we believe this population succeeds at Mather because of our priority on Social/Emotional Learning and our commitment to the belief that all students can succeed if given time and opportunity. (In 2018, of the 19 graduates who had IEPs, 11 graduated with Regents Diplomas and one graduated with an Advanced Regents Diploma, and collectively approximately 28 college credits from college classes offered here through Syracuse University. In addition to our IEP students, a majority of our students enter Mather with below grade level skills in both mathematics and English language arts. To best serve the needs of this segment of the Mather HS student population, we are committed to providing individualized attention and instruction, time in tutoring and targeted, leveled literacy and math instruction and intervention, and on-going social-emotional support and guidance. We build time in the schedule to address this through our MBLI time (small group instruction to help students fill the gaps in their mastery of content and skills.)  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, considering the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Mather HS made even more progress with regard to collaborative teachers. Having completed our fifth year, Mather HS used the year to think about our teacher team structures and began the process of creating plans on how these teams could better help push learning and instruction in the years ahead, thereby improving rigorous instruction. Similar to previous years, our efforts to foster collaboration among our teachers are evidenced by both our belief in distributed leadership and corresponding actions of teacher-led teams. At Mather HS, numerous teachers take on varied leadership positions, including grade team leaders, department leaders (which will become Mastery-Based Learning and Instruction teams (MBLI ), Packvisory Team leaders, The Writing Revolution (TWR) team leaders, CUNY instructional leadership team members, hiring team leaders, and school leadership team members. With teachers both leading and/or participating on all the school-based teams, professional collaboration focused on both improving teacher practice and student outcomes is a consistent school-wide practice. For next year, we will use our learning from The Power of Teacher Teams at Harvard University and our school wide goals to help individual teacher-leaders and teacher-team-members improve and refine their instructional practices in order to improve student outcomes. For the 2018-2019 school year, the key area of focus for Mather HS will be improving our ability to provide our students with rigorous classroom instruction though improving our pedagogical skills. As classroom instruction at Mather HS is rooted in our belief in Common Core Learning Standards-Based mastery, our ability to successfully increase the rigor of our instruction will required a deeper understanding of these standards from both our students and staff alike, as well as how and why we assess effectively using a mastery-based approach. Mather intends to further utilize our established team structures this year to address assessment in instruction and rigorous practices, all with the intention of improving student achievement. By utilizing overt transparency in an effort to increase both student and teacher awareness and understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards, Mastery-based Learning and Instruction (MBLI) , and the The Writing Revolution (TWR), it is our goal to increase the rigor of instruction at 2018-19 CEP 11  Mather HS. We will also continue to focus on further developing our school's supportive environment through our Packvisory program where the instructional focus remains support social-emotion learning and growth. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M139 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 394 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 81.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 66.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 4% 39% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 56% 82.7% 4.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 81 81 22 86.0% 2.3% 24.6% 25.9% 2.0% 1.3% 4 89% 2.2 N/A N/A 76% 67% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Classroom instruction at Mather is rooted in our belief that students should work toward mastering Common Core standards, and using a corresponding mastery-based assessment system to provide on-going feedback and to adjust instruction. Mather teachers have been asked to design Common-Core standards-based instruction and have been supported in these efforts by the school administration, instructional coaches and the teams. In addition, they design assessments using the TWR and other aligned strategies. Although Mather teachers continue to develop their ability to design and implement rigorous Common Core Standards-based instruction, one of the school's strengths relative to the Framework Element of rigorous instruction is the growth of our teachers’ classroom pedagogy as evidenced by 2017-2018 Advance Observational Data. Although the majority (55.04%) of the teacher ratings for Domain 3 components scored “Effective” or higher, these numbers do not correlate with college readiness indicators of our student performance, as evidenced by the following 2017-2018 Regents Data:  The college readiness standard (score of 75 or better) for the Algebra Regents was met by 17% (21/121) students  The college readiness standard score (75 or better) for the ELA Regents was met by 46% (43/92) of our students. As evidenced by this data, a priority need for Mather HS is continuing to increase the rigor of classroom instruction, as demonstrated by a increase in student college readiness on the 2018-2019 ELA and Algebra Regents Exam data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across Mather classes, evidenced by an increase in the average number of students demonstrating college readiness in ELA and math. This goal will be measured by 1) a 9% increase in ELA student college readiness from 46% to 55%, and 2) an 8% increase in Math (algebra) student college readiness from 17% to 25%. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide summer professional development to any  New new staff focused on an introduction to utilizing the TWR Writing Method, used by all teachers at Mather HS and to introduce teachers to MBLI. TWR Writing Method aligns with UDL principles and allows all students to access and engage with structured writing assignments. Teachers  Teachers will conduct inquiry cycles based around  All using data to identify areas of opportunity for student learning in MBLI Teams  Mastery Connect PD on June 26th and throughout the 2018-2019 SY  Teachers will meet 45, 75 or 120 minutes a week to work on MBLI teachers Teachers will create plans to address areas of need in MBLI Teams. Teams will give special attention to data determined needs of ENL, students with IEPs, and overage/under-credited students.  All Teacher  MBLI Teams Sept-June. Teachers will receive individual coaching and group PD during schedule times to do this, and a schedule will be given. Sept-October August 30 and 31  Mather Administration  Mather Instructional Coaches  New Mather Teachers  Mather Administration  Mather Instructional Coaches  Mather Teachers  MBLI Teams Instructional  Coaches  MBLI Team Leaders  Admin  MBLI Teams Instructional  Coaches  MBLI Team Leaders  Admin After identifying student needs, teachers will use data results to inform future instructional practices. These instructional practices will target specific academic needs of all student subgroups, and will included hands-on learning and UDL principles.  All Sept- June Teacher  MBLI Teams 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to build family awareness around the college readiness standards for both ELA and Mathematics, Mather HS will utilize the Welcome Back Night in early October and November Student-Led Conferences. October's Welcome Back Night will planned by the school administration, with each grade team (9,10,11,12) responsible for sharing grade/student-specific information with attending families. Additionally, more specific student progress data will be shared with families during November's Student-Led Conferences. These conferences, which include meticulous student planning and preparation, will offer families the opportunity to hear their student speak to their individual academic progress in all scheduled classes. At both of these meeting opportunities, families will be informed/reminded how they can access their students grades online, ensuring that all student progress can be monitored closely at home as well as at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mather teachers and administrators will facilitate this process without any major schedule adjustments, and will utilize the following existing structures: Summer New Staff Professional Development   Two Mather full time instructional coaches will provide regular support and feedback to teachers in order to improve our school wide literacy and and math instruction  Utilizing bi-weekly grade team and department team meetings, teachers will engage in lesson/unit tuning protocols in order to share best practices, and receive peer feedback. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 15, 2019, though the data-driven refinement of the Mather academic instructional practices, mock ELA and Algebra Regents Exam Data will evidence at least a 5% increase in students scoring at or above college readiness on both their ELA and Math Regents exams from 38% to 43% in ELA and from 17% to 23% in Algebra. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Mock Regents Data  Advance/Observation Reports  Regents Data Reports  Mastery Connect Data  Whetstone 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Mather Strengths: The information below comes from our 2017-2018 School Survey :  91% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria.  93% of students say that they feel safe in their classes.  84% of high school students say that adults at their school inform them about the college application process.  86% of high school students say that adults at their school talk to them about what they plan to do after high school.  89% of high school students say that adults at their school encourage them to continue their education after high school. As evidenced by the School Survey data above, the majority of students surveyed, indicated that Mather HS provides a environment in which they feel safe. While 93% of Mather students feel safe in their classes, 91% feel safe in the hallways and other shared spaces within the campus. Additionally, the majority of students surveyed agreed that the adults at Mather help keep them challenged and focused on their paths towards graduation, college and/or career. However, despite the fact that the vast majority of our student body feel safe and challenged at Mather, the 2017-2018 school year included a 38% of chronic absenteeism. In order to effectively service all of our students, moving forward it is crucial that Mather HS decrease this rate of chronic absenteeism. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will continue to develop and refine our supportive environment through the implementation of a targeted and comprehensive social emotional learning curriculum in Packvisory (Mather HS advisory program), utilizing circles three times a week so that by June 2019 we will decrease Mather HS's chronic absenteeism rate by 14% from 39% to 25%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September - June  Mather  Administration,  Guidance  Community Associate  Teachers  Social Workers  Pack Teams  All Mather Students  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Pack Team Leaders worked over the summer to completely redesign the Mather advisory curriculum with a more specific focus on social-emotion learning-based circle activities that connect and support the specific themes of the unit  Teachers will conduct three pack circles a week which will include one SEL circle  Teachers will meet in grade teams three times a month to continue to refine the Mather advisory curriculum  As part of the established Mather peer-mediation program, select Mather students will be trained to lead restorative circles (guided by social emotional learning practices) in order to help mediate interpersonal conflicts/potential conflicts. In addition, regarding attendance specifically, the specified Mather attendance team will take the following action steps throughout the year:  Conduct School wide roll out Mather Attendance Policy (including the following lateness/absenteeism intervention steps):  Make Daily Phone Calls: provided daily when a student is late or absent; it is important that the school have the correct phone number on file so that the calls reach a parent or guardian.  Packvisor Phone Calls: provided by advisers or teachers when a student reaches (two) 2 or more absences from school or class in a week (or consecutive absences); or four (4) or more absences from class or school in a month. The same is true for lateness. Individual Student Attendance Summary: provided every progress period; provides a summary of the number and type(s) of student absences.  2018-19 CEP 19    Excessive Absence Notification Letter: generated when ½ of the number of permitted absences has been accumulated in a class. The purpose of this notification will be to inform the parent and the student of the possibility of falling behind which could lead to the loss of credit if the student's attendance does not improve. Students with IEPs: Every student with an IEP is assigned a Special Education Case Manager (of the two grade-level ICT teachers) when they enter Mather HS. In addition to writing, implementing and revising their students' IEPS, these case managers are also responsible for establishing and maintaining constant communication with their students' families. The nature of this communication is to share news regarding student progress and concerns as well as issues regarding both student attendance and lateness. Weekly attendance/lateness data analysis to identify students in need of lateness/absenteeism intervention steps. Consistently late and absent students Engage in lateness/absenteeism intervention steps including verbal warning, parent outreach, and requests for parent meetings. More specifically each day all absences and lateness’s are recorded by the assistant principal and community associate. Daily phone calls are provided with any absence or lateness. Teachers or advisors call home after a child misses two days. After more than 3 days, a certified letter is sent home by the assistant principal as well as a follow up phone call. Letters are sent home in English and the native language of the family if required. The special education teachers identify any IEP related reasons for extensive absences and provide documentation of such to the rest of the staff. In addition, each day at 11:00am automated calls are sent to all homes of students who are absent or late. The school also implements Wake Up calls for excessively absent or late students. Engaging Families: Maintain regular communication with parents and guardians utilizing scheduled parent outreach time. During this scheduled time, teacher's engage in outreach to the families of all Mather students, including all sub-groups. Additionally, in order to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children, Mather students' families are invited to Mather HS on numerous occasions throughout the year to participate in various school functions. These functions include, but are not limited to, the Mather Gather September - June Mather Administration, Guidance Community Associate September - June  Mather Administration  Guidance  Community Associate  Attendance teacher Consistently late and absent students All Mather Students September - June  Mather Administration  Guidance  Community Associate  Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 Celebration (a Thanksgiving Celebration), Winter Wishes Celebration, Parent Night Dinner, National Park Service (NPS) Parent Night, Perfect Attendance Luncheon, and Mather Move-Up. The purpose of these events is to both build and strengthen school culture and engage our parents in their children's school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will maintain regular communication with parents and guardians utilizing scheduled parent outreach time. During this scheduled time, teacher's engage in outreach to the families of all Mather students, including all sub-groups. Additionally, in order to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children, Mather students' families are invited to Mather HS on numerous occasions throughout the year to participate in various school functions. These functions include, but are not limited to, the Mather Gather Celebration (a Thanksgiving Celebration), Winter Wishes Celebration, Parent Night Dinner, National Park Service (NPS) Parent Night, Perfect Attendance Luncheon, and Mather Move-Up. The purpose of these events is to both build and strengthen school culture and engage our parents in their children's school community. Through our hosting of numerous school-events, Mather HS teachers and administrators will succeed in getting families to come in to the school to learn first hand about our supportive environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Mather administration will design and supervise the implementation of school attendance policies and Mather teachers will record accurate attendance records.  Teachers will utilize both the official ATS attendance and our online JumpRope to maintain real-time accurate attendance records.  The administrative support team will cross reference the systems to identify any student attendance concerns or discrepancies  Both teachers and administration will maintain regular contact with both students and families regarding attendance concerns.  No schedule revisions are necessary as teachers will utilize scheduled parental outreach time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 21   Tracking students in ISS and out of school suspension to monitor a decrease  ATS reports will show an increase in student attendance   By February 1, 2018 the Mather HS attendance rate will be at least 92% as evidence by ATS reports. so that Fewer ORRS reports the year may end at 90% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Reports, Individual class attendance lists, lateness reports, cutting reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With high structured and active teacher-led grade-level and department teams, teacher collaboration is both a priority and strength at Mather HS. During the scheduled weekly teacher-led grade-level and department team meetings (These will be re-branded as MBLI Teams), Mather teachers collaboratively engage in professional development in order to make continuous improvements to both their individual classes and the school as a whole. The following data is from the 2017-2018 school Quality Snapshot and/or School Survey  86% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together.  81% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. (Q8b)  88% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.  95% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. As evidenced by this data, the vast majority of teachers acknowledge that professional collaboration is prioritized at Mather HS. As a result of this professional collaboration, Mather teachers have successfully supported their students in their efforts to accrue the academic credit required for graduation. During the 2017-2018, the students in grade 9-11 had a 91% accreditation rate, earning 7209 of the attempted 7945 academic credits. For the 2018-2019, the Mather community seeks to improve this accreditation rate, thus reducing the amount of students falling behind with regards to their academic credit and projected graduated year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration in the implementation of MBL-instruction (Mastery Based Learning) that engages all learners with UDL strategies will lead to improved student achievement, as evidenced by at least a 4% increase in average credit accumulation, from 91% to 95%. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan  Systemized instructional rounds will be implemented as a way for all teachers to observed MBLI-based best instructional practices of others, and ultimately, will lead to the horizontal and vertical aligned of instructional practices and create consistency for students in the school  All Mather teachers will participate in scheduled weekly meetings with their grade-level teams to collaboratively address any academic and social issues pertaining to individual students, specific student subgroups (including ENLs, students with IEPS and overage under-credited students), or the grade-level team as a whole. All Mather teachers will participate in weekly meetings with their department teams (ELA, Science, Math, Social Studes, Special Education/ENL, and CTE) to collaboratively disseminate content-specific best MBL-based practices and UDL teaching strategies to improve academic achievement across all student subgroups. Quarterly student progress report grade data will be generated and analyzed by grade-level teams in order to identify any individual students, or specific student subgroups, in need of Academic Intervention Services to ensure student achievement. Utilizing quarterly progress report grade data, in December and April, Mather teachers will collaboratively implement after school "Academic Over Time" as a required Academic Intervention Service for any students that are not demonstrating mastery in any of their academic courses. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement  All Sept-June  Grade Team teachers  All students Members including Mather Administration, teachers and instructional coaches All Students Sept-June Individual teachers as requested Nov, January, March, May All Students December and May Department Team Members, including, Mather Administration, teachers and instructional coaches Grade Team Members including Mather Administration, teachers and instructional coaches Grade Team Members including Mather Administration, teachers and instructional coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To ensure family engagement and awareness of their students' academic progress, in addition to the bi-annual Student-Led-Conferences, quarterly progress reports will be generated and provided to Mather families. Additionally, students' families will be provided with access to an online portal where they can monitor academic progress in real time. Furthermore, any student that is identified as in need of Academic Intervention Services will be scheduled for mandatory after school "Academic Over Time", and families will be contacted and informed by their student's adviser. Lastly, regarding students with IEPs, Mather special education teachers each carry a caseload of roughly 15 students, and are responsible for 1) writing/implementing IEPs and 2) establishing and maintaining communication with student families in order to convey information regarding student progress and discuss Academic Intervention Services when appropriate. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To help achieve our goal increasing our student accreditation, in addition the work completed within their daily work schedule, for two weeks in December and May, Mather administrators and teachers will host after school "Academic Over Time" three days a week from 3:30-5:00pm. These participating administrators and teachers will be compensated with supervisor and teacher per-session. No additional schedule adjustments or instructional resources will be necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of first semester (roughly February 1, 2019), semester grade-data will be generated in order to evidence at least a 2% increase in projected student accreditation from 91% to 93%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As Mather is an annualized school, in order to measure our mid-year progress, projected student accreditation data will be generated (and used to assess progress) utilizing Mastery Connect Online Grading System. Official STARS grade data will be used for June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of Mather's effective school leadership is evidenced by our numerous established school systems, including, our teacher-led teams, systems for providing teachers with regular professional development, and clearly established expectations regarding professionalism. As part of two highly structured teacher-teams = grade-level and department - every Mather teacher engages in bi-weekly structured professional collaboration using an inquiry approach that focuses on developing and sharing both curriculum and best practices in an effort to improve student learning and achievement. More specifically, these teacher-led department and grade-level teams work to ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and make purposeful decisions to integrate the instructional shifts. Additionally, teachers at Mather receive regular professional develop - from two full-time instructional coaches - in order to ensure that all teachers are supported in their efforts to align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Lastly, at Mather, high expectations regarding professionalism, instruction, communication are regularly communicated to the staff, and support is provided to help the staff meet these expectations. Although effective elements of Mather's leadership is reflected in the school systems, teacher-teams and school culture, student achievement on Regents exams still represents a challenge for the school leaders. The June 2017 Regents exams resulted in a 45.67% school-wide passing rate, with 457 passing scores out of 1016 exams taken. This 45.67% school-wide Regents exam passing rate evidences a clear need for improvement regarding teacher instructional practices at Mather. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will create and implement an impactful professional development plan as evidenced by at least a 4% increase in the overall average of teacher ADVANCE ratings in Domain 3 (Instruction), from a rating of 2.88 to at least a rating of 3.0 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As a component of Mather 2018 PD plan, all teachers will participate in structured/systemized instructional rounds as a means for all teachers to observed MBL-based best instructional practices of their colleagues, and then use their observations to both reflect on and modify their own instructional practices. All Mather teachers will participate in weekly meetings with their department teams (ELA, Science, Math, Social Studes, Special Education/ENL, and CTE) to collaboratively disseminate content-specific best MBL-based practices and UDL teaching strategies to both improve (and then align) instructional practices horizontally across grade levels. In order to improve (and aligned) literacy-based instructional practices throughout the school, all Mather teachers will receive in-house professional development focused on their ability to incorporate 'The Writing Revolution' strategies in their daily instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Mather Teachers Specific schedule visits from September - June Mather Teachers, Instructional Coaches, Administration All Mather Teachers Weekly from September to June. All Mather Students Monthly from September to June. Mather Teachers, Instructional Coaches, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  The Mather administration has established systems that establish and maintain regular communication between Mather Administration, teachers/teacher-advisers with student families. This will include both regular electronic/telecommunication and in-person discussions at numerous events hosted by Mather HS. Additionally, student families have the opportunity to engaged with school leaders as part of the Parent-Teachers Association (PTA) and/or the School Leadership Team (SLT), a team that helps to develop the Mather school goals as outline in this document. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The human resources include the Mather administration, instructional Coaches, and Teachers. As the vast majority of Mather PD takes place during scheduled meeting time, no addition scheduling adjustments or funds will be necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By 2/1/19, Advance data will evidence at least a 2% increase in the overall average of Mather teacher ratings in Domain 3, Instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Mather High School has developed and implemented many systems design to promote strong family and community ties. These systems include, but are not limited to regular teacher-family outreach, regular advisor-family outreach, September's Open School Night, Student-Led-Conferences, PTA meetings, Mastery Connect Grading System Parent Portal, School Leadership Team Meetings, and numerous school culture celebration activities (New Student Orientation, Mather Gather, Holiday Recess Celebration, Spirit Week Celebration, Mather and National Park Service Parent Night, Mather Move-Up Celebration and Mather graduation. Resulting from these systems, Mather’s strength in building strong family and community ties has been our ability to involve our students’ families in their educational experience. The results of Mather strong family and community ties are evidenced by the following parent feedback from the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot  87% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance.  88% of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes.  82% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event.  94% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher.  A “Well Developed” score of 4.99 for the question: how effectively does the school partner with families to support student success? (3.4) Despite our on-going efforts to develop strong family and community ties, there is still room for improvement. To further involve our students’ families in their educational experience, it is crucial that we increase our parent/guardians attendance at our Student-Led-Conferences. By attending Student-Led-Conferences, parent/guardians have the opportunity to meet their child’s teachers, discuss their progress, and share any question or concerns they may have. This direct parental involved strengthens Mather’s ability to communicate effectively with our students’ families, and supports our efforts to encourage academic achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our family and community ties by engaging more families in meaningful collaboration regarding their child's progress, as evidenced by at least an 8% increase in families' attendance and participation in Student-Led-Conferences (these conferences are educational planning meetings where students are empowered to demonstrate their mastery in their courses on CC standards to their parents, and parents are encouraged to ask questions and provide reflection at the end. We want to increase this from 72% (282 of 392) to 80%. 2018-19 CEP 29  2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Mather HS will continue to host its bi-annual Student-Led-Conferences, and in advance of these events, student families will be contacted by their students advisers, with the support of the parent coordinator, to schedule appointments. Students and their Families November, 2018 and March 2019 Student Families September - June Students and their Families September - June Mather Administration, Mather Teachers, Mather Family Coordinator Mather Administration, Mather teachers Mather Administration, Mather Parent Coordinator September - June Mather Administration, Mather teachers Students with IEPs, ELLs, overage/under-credited students. All staff/teachers Sept-June Mather Administration Mather HS will continue its parental outreach policy and will provide teachers with schedule time to facilitate this. Each students' family is to receive at least three positive phone calls home per semester. These calls are in addition to any other calls regarding grades, or student concerns. Mather HS will continue to host its numerous cultural celebrations described above. In an effort to increase family attendance, the Mather Parent Coordinator will make proactive efforts, including phone blasts, individual phone calls, and mass mailings, to inform and remind families of these celebrations. Additionally, during Open School Night on October 2nd 2018, our Parent Coordinator will share with families the details about upcoming events, and have the chance to sign up to involve themselves and other family members. In addition to the regular systemized parental/family contact described above, the families of students with disabilities and English Language learners have an added level of home contact from their teacher-caseload workers. Members of the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) remain in regular with the parents of the students on their caseloads regarding both the IEP process and their individual progress throughout the year. The progress of students that are overage/under-credited is closely monitored by members of administration, and regular parental contact is made to keep them informed of that progress, In both grade team and advisory meetings, members of both the Mather Administration and guidance team will educate & inform teachers/staff about the importance of strong school-family ties in order to encourage the regular communication (during scheduled/provided time) and subsequent information sharing that can empower parents to effectively advocate for their students. 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The National Parks Service, Ramapo Camp for Children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In addition to contacting students’ families on their own time, teachers are provided with weekly scheduled time specifically for the purpose of parental/guardian outreach. This parental/guardian outreach time has been built into the Mather master schedule, and does not require any schedule adjustments. Additionally, our Mastery Connect grading systems enables parents/guardians regular access to view both their child’s current academic progress, and any missing assignments posted by teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, increased school-family communication will result in at least 5% increase in the number of families participating in first semester Student-Led-Conference (educational planning meetings), from 72% to 77% (of the total # of Mather families). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student-Led Conferences Attendance Records, Teacher Call Logs, Main Office Communication/Visit Logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) STAR Reading Program Urgent Intervention or Intervention classification STAR Math Program Urgent Intervention or Intervention classification Grade of below 70 at midpoint of each semester Social Studies Grade of below 70 at midpoint of each semester Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading Groups, Renaissance Reading Program, Leveled Classroom readings and writing assignments, Purposeful grouping Targeted instruction including leveled classroom assignments, guided tasks, purposeful grouping, and teacher modeling Targeted instruction including leveled classroom assignments, guided readings and writing, purposeful grouping, and teacher modeling. Targeted instruction including leveled classroom assignments, guided readings and writing, purposeful grouping, and teacher modeling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to- one instruction, small group instruction, teacher tutoring, peer tutoring, teacher push-in, student pull-out When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) MBL (Mastery-Based Learning Period), throughout the school day, after school, selected Saturdays, and during lunch period One-to- one instruction, small group instruction, teacher tutoring, peer tutoring, teacher push-in, student pull-out One-to- one instruction, small group instruction, teacher tutoring, peer tutoring, teacher push-in, student pull-out MBL (Mastery-Based Learning Period), throughout the school day, after school, selected Saturdays, and during lunch period MBL (Mastery-Based Learning Period) throughout the school day, after school, selected Saturdays, and during lunch period One-to- one instruction, small group instruction, teacher tutoring, peer tutoring, teacher push-in, student pull-out MBL (Mastery-Based Learning Period), throughout the school day, after school, selected Saturdays, and during lunch period 2018-19 CEP 33  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As mandated by student IEP or as needed basis determined by teacher and/or admin Observation Counseling Services During the school day One-to- one instruction, small group instruction, teacher tutoring, peer tutoring, teacher push-in, student pull-out 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 29 students are currently identified as Student in Temporary Housing (STH). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In order to support our STH population, we will utilize the Title 1 set-aside funds to purchase them both school and personal supplies as needed. Additionally, to support the social-emotional development and well being of our STH population, we will provide them with in-house counseling from our social worker(s). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prospective Mather teachers are interviewed by our teacher-lead hiring committee, in the group interview format, with a select few candidates moving on to individual meetings with the Mather administration. Once hired, new Mather teachers participate in a series of summer new teacher induction professional development sessions where they receive training on planning and implementing rigorous CCLS aligned units and lessons. Additionally, new Mather teachers also learn about the Mather culture, the Five Mather Core Values, and key programmatic elements like the Mather advisory and Enrichment/Remediation (ER) programs. Throughout the year, all Mather teachers are supported professionally with regular professional development sessions and individual coaching provide by the full time Mather instructional coaches. Additionally, every spring the Mather administration hosts an overnight retreat to provide the entire staff with an elongated period of time to receive additional PD, collaboratively reflect on the passing year, and make strategic decisions for the coming year. Lastly, the Mather administration regularly celebrates the efforts of the teachers, and provides an abundance of teacher appreciation in the form of public praise, personal praise, small gifts, free meals, birthday/engagement celebrations, and other acts of general professional kindness and generosity. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a school that utilizes a CCLS Mastery grading policy, our teacher’s ability to effectively implement the CCLS in their instruction is paramount to Mather's success. To ensure that our teachers have proper support, ongoing professional development will be provided by the full-time Mather instructional coaches. This professional development, beginning in the summer and continuing throughout the school year, will focus on designing and implementing rigorous CCLS aligned instruction that includes engaging hands-on learning activities. Additionally, the professional development sessions offered to teachers will include: Summer PD:  A series of professional development workshops focused on designing engaging, rigorous, and coherent CCLS based curricula led by the Mather Instructional Coaches.  Teachers were offered time for individual meetings with instructional coaches for instructional support focusing on designing hands-on project based activities to support their CCLS based curricula 2018-19 CEP 37   All teachers were offered additional PD on special education best practices, the ICT relationships, classroom management, questioning, lesson planning  New teachers were offered PD at the Tenement Museum to link their instruction to historic preservation Throughout the year, our teachers will be able to utilize the following resources to support them professionally:   Instructional Coaches: Our instructional coaches will provide teachers with daily individual instructional support to assist in their development of designing and implementing engaging, rigorous, and coherent CCLS based curricula with hands-on project-based activities Instructional Strategies Meetings: Bi-weekly instructional strategies meetings will be led by the Mather instructional coaches. The content of these meetings will be driven by teacher generated interest or teacher need as evidence by school administration.  Teacher Planning Time: Weekly interdisciplinary and ICT co-planning sessions will provide teachers with regular opportunities to meet with both ICT partners and content area teachers to collaborate on curriculum design and implementation.  Grade Team Meetings: Weekly grade team meetings will provide grade team teachers with the opportunity to collaboratively share, analyze, and revise interdisciplinary initiatives such as cross curricular alignment to the CCLS.  Department Head Team Meetings: Weekly department team meetings will provide department heads with the opportunity to collaboratively share, analyze, and revise unit plans with purposeful feedback through the implementation of both critical lens and tuning protocol activities.  Classroom Inter-Visitations: Teachers will be provided with multiple opportunities to visit and observe their colleagues who have demonstrated their ability to design and implemented engaging, rigorous, and coherent CCLS based units and lessons.  CUNY (Affinity Group) Instructional Leadership PD Series: Selected Mather teachers will attend an annualized series of instructional leadership PDs hosted by our cooperating CUNY network partner. The Mather teachers will then be on the PD Committee to work with the instructional coaches on PD offerings and the year-end retreat.  Mather HS Weekly Online Archive. : Teachers have access to and will receive continuous training on utilizing the Mather HS Weekly Online Archive. By uploading their curriculum on the Mather HS Weekly Online Archive. , teachers will have ongoing opportunities to collaborate online with both their ICT partner and interdisciplinary peers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In addition to the mandated Regent exams taken by all students, in alignment with the Mather High School instructional philosophy, instructional unit summative assessments are designed and implemented as hands-on, project-based learning activities. While teachers are responsible for designing their own content based summative assessments, they receive feedback on these assessments by engaging in tuning protocols with both their grade and department teams. Teachers present their assessments, engage in the protocol process, and are provided with both warm and cool feedback from their peer which is used to guide any necessary revisions. To prepare our teachers to participate in these tuning protocols, new and returning teachers will participate collaboratively in a practice tuning protocol during our August whole staff professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 246,059 N/A N/A N/A 3,521,350 X N/A N/A N/A X 2018-19 CEP 39 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5D,5E N/A N/A N/A 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 40   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Stephen T. Mather Building Arts & Craftsmanship High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Mather HS will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 42  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Actively encouraging (through outreach) student families to participate in the bi-annual Mather Student-Led-Conferences  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities throughout the school year;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  PTA Meetings: Parents/guardians are welcome to join for the Mather PTA meetings. Meeting schedules are determined by the PTA, and meeting information is communicated from the school to the parents/guardian  Utilizing Regular Family Outreach: o Regular content teacher outreach o Regular advisor-advisee outreach o Regular IEP case manager outreach  Jump Rope Parent Portal: To provide feedback to students and parents, the online grading system JumpRope is utilized to identify the skills that teachers are addressing, core values they are grading, and record anecdotal comments. Students and families have access to this information and in student-led conferences, students speak articulate their progress and areas of strength, areas that needs improvement with their parents and teachers.  Host numerous Cultural Celebrations Open to Parents, including: Incoming freshman orientation (June before incoming Sept) o o Mather Gather Celebration (before Thanksgiving Break) o Holiday Recess Celebration (before Holiday Break) o Spirit Week Assembly Celebration (held in March) o Mather Parent Dinner (held during Spring) o Mather Move-Up Ceremony (held during June) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Stephen T. Mather Building Arts & Craftsmanship HS (Mather HS) in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 44  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 45   Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 2 School Name S T Mather Bldng Arts & Crftsmnshp HS School Number 139 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Larry D. Gabbard Coach Rachel Fein ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Arlene Burgher Teacher/Subject Area Emily Williams/Science Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Christopher Mayer/Paul Kelly Coach type here School Counselor Christina Martini Parent Otto Starzman Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 287 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We utilize two formal diagnostics for all incoming ELLs aside from the NYSITELL. An English diagnostic and a skill based assessment (STAR Reading for reading comprehension). We also use the reading/ELA scores of the 8 th grade tests. Results of these diagnostics reveal two important data points. Reading comprehension skill deficits and writing skill deficts are considered so that we can monitor and design intervention programs for individual students. If students have identified skill deficits, Integrated ENL is provided to ELLs in Math, Science, ELA, and History by a content teacher and ENL co-teacher. With regard to our ELL population, they are on trend with the majority of the cohort in terms of proficiency. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We meet as grade level and department level teams weekly to address the needs of individual students 2018-19 CEP 49  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will be using the data from the 2017 NYSESLAT to evaluate our program, as well as the credit accumulation and grades of our ELL students. We will also use their results on the US History Regents and any other Regents we administer this year. Further success will be predicated on students showing growth in their language acquisition and skills in reading, writing, listening and oral comprehension in English as demonstrated on passing the English Regents in their 11th grade year. All students needing additional instruction in ESL or English are given small group instruction as well as after school support to help pass the English Regents. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We meet as grade level and department level teams weekly to address the needs of individual students. We then use targeted interventions during special times of the days, pull-out, after-school or during our Academic Overtime Program after school and on weekends. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A High School 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing our students' data, most of our students are at an Expanding level in reading comprehension and writing skills. According to NYSESLAT scores, 10 of our students are at an Expanding level, 2 at Transitioning levels, 3 at Emerging levels, and 2 are at the Entering level. There is no direct correlation between years of ELL service and NYSESLAT performance levels. ELLs who do not have IEPs and have received 4 to 6 years of ELL services scored at Expanding levels. However, ELLs who do have IEPS and have received ELL services for 4 to 6 years scored at Entering or Emerging levels. All ELLs who scored at Emerging levels and Entering levels have IEPs. Description of NYSITELL data is not available because our ELLs took the LAB-R before coming to our school. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We meet weekly in staff, department, grade-levael and advisory team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Integrated ENL model uses co-teaching to improve Literacy skills in ELLs. All ELLs are programmed in Math, Science, History, and ELA with a content teacher and an ENL co-teacher. The focus is on reinforcing expository writing and language acquisition skills. Students are then heterogenously mixed in small groups of four with general education students that have higher reading levels of no more than 2 reading levels. These classes travel together as a group for the whole day. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 50  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All classes are taught in English; ELA, Math, Science and History are 45 minutes per period five times a week. A content teacher and ENL teacher co-teach 2 blocks of ELL students daily. All of our ELLs receive over 360 minutes (2 units) of Integrated ENL instruction. Expanding level students are given small groups with higher reading levels than their Emerging or Entering counterparts. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content area is delivered in English with native language support. We used a sheltered English approach because the vast majority of our ELLs are at Expanding performance levels. The content teacher and ENL teacher collaborate in creating learning activities that connect new content to students' prior knowledge, that require collaboration among students, and that offer ELLs grade-level CCLS instruction that is adapted to suit their English proficiency level. Regents examinations will be also administered in their choice of language, though we anticipate most if not all will take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource as needed. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language if needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are not presently evaluated in their native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. After an ELL is identified as being a SIFE, the ENL teacher will work with grade wide content teachers to provide differentiated instruction. SIFE students will receive scaffolded instructional materials in their preferred language. SIFE students will be assessed through multiple modalities, which include project-based assessments and kinesthetic learning activities. Speech technology will be used to communicate with the SIFE as needed. The ENL teacher will also stay with a SIFE student afterschool at least once a week to work on literacy and math skills as needed. b. Instruction is differentiated for Newcomers by providing structured inquiry projects that guide their learning and development of literacy skills. Assessments are scaffolded with sentence starters, graphic organizers, and exemplar models of finished work products. Most learning activities are differentiated with visuals, non-verbal prompts, repeated directions, maps, photos, and other manipulatives. Bilingual dictionaries and translation technology are provided as needed. c. Lessons are differentiated for Developing ELLs by maintaining structured inquiry projects, but increasing the percentage of higher order thinking questions. Developing ELLs are encouraged to present information through illustrations and other visual mediums in addition to written reflections on their work products. d. Long Term ELLs participate in differentiated instruction by participating in more open ended inquiry. Learning activities are usually collaborative and take place in a variety of groupings so students can interact with Spanish speaking and English speaking peers. Anticipation and Reacting guides are used to encourage dialogue before and after a learning activity. Hochman writing strategies support Long Term ELLs with creating well-structured and detailed sentences and paragraphs. e. Former ELLs will remain in the same blocks with current ELLs for up to two years after exiting ELL status. They will receive differentiated instruction identical to the Long Term ELLs. Former ELLs will be encouraged to take leadership and tutoring roles when working collaboratively with current ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 51  Testing accommodations, such as extended time, Braille, large print texts, will be provided to ELLs as needed or as mandated by their IEPs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers are on a grade-level team and share the resources available to ALL students. All rooms are wireless with Internet capabilities, all ELLs students have access to audio versions of literature and whole class novels to support them in English. Voice recognition software is used to help ELLs with oral comprehension. All books have native language translations as needed. Textbooks and original teacher-created materials are used in classes where ENL support is needed. ENL support from the ENL teacher is used when translating notes and lectures during small group instruction. Dictionaries are available upon request. The STAR Reading program is ment to encourage reading development and reading comprehension. Google Translate is a great piece of technology that is meant to develop reading skills in ELLs. There is a camera feature that immediately translates whatever text the camera is looking at into the student's preferred language. This feature works best for Long Term ELLs who are more independent learners. Google Read and Write is another tech tool that ENL teachers use to accelerate English language development. This tool is connected to a browser and students can highlight, annotate, and interact with several components of a web page. For example, 9 th grade Newcomer ELLs can benefit from the pictionary tool that takes a highlighted word and shows a pop up of the matching image. Google Read and Write also helps Developing ELLs by reading highlighted text out loud, making it easier for ELLs to summarize the key points of a web article. Google Read and Write has helped ELLs with disabilities that make it difficult to communicate, such as Speech and Language Impairment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWD students are in an ICT-setting to reach their instructional goals. ELLs and Students with IEPs still engage in the General Education curriculum, advisory, clubs, core content classes, and academic trips along with general education peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic intervention services for identified ELLs include: Action Oriented Time where they can get additional support in all content areas after school or on weekends, tutorials after school with ENL and content teachers and student tutors to help with homework completion, Regents prep classes after school and Saturdays to help prepare for all core content examinations, English and native language practice, NYSESLAT prep with ENL teacher after schools. Intervention programs are mostly provided in English, but can be provided in Spanish as needed. ELA: Intervention programs include the STAR accelerated reading program (all ELL subgroups) and student to student tutoring (Newcomer ELLs and Developing ELLs) Math: Intervention programs for Developing ELLs include aftershchool tutoring (all ELLs) and hands on assessments and learning activities (Developing ELLs and Long Term ELLs). Social Studies: In order to assess ELLs and SWDs through visual and kinesthetic modalities, maps, photos, and Google Goggles are used to check for content knowledge understanding (all ELL subgroups). Science: Newcomer ELLs and SIFE ELLs are asked to stay afterschool to do anticipation guides and KWL charts that help prepare them for the next day's lesson. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Some improvements include: systemizing outreach to parents about ELL services and scheduling time to small-group ENL instruction before or afterschool to meet the needs of our Entering level ELLs. The school has used data from NYSESLAT test scores and STAR Reading assessments to provide additional instruction in English. The school has implemented the STAR reading program, which engages student access to English fiction and then tests their reading comprehension through formal assessments. Most identified patterns in skills deficits usually result in additional enrichment programs for individual students, online resources or supplemental classes that support English acquisition. Additional after school programs with our ENL teacher are also scheduled as needed. 2018-19 CEP 52  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to ALL of our school-wide programs. We also offer translation services for students and for parents. Supplemental services include NYSESLAT prep, Regents prep, and Tutorials in all subjects. Our school offers Career and Technical Education pathways in the specialized building arts of carpentry, masonry, decorative finishes, as well as landscape management through the lens of historic preservation. ELLs will build a strong academic foundation and learn solid trade skills, opening doors to a secure and successful future. They will graduate with a CTE industry approved certification and/or college-approved credentials; learn skills in Carpentry (woodworking), Masonry (stone/brick/plastering); Decorative Finishes (art/painting/ornamental work); Landscape Management; Internships and Job Shadowing with our partner The National Park Service (NPS) and other industry partners; our mathematics, sciences, technology and humanities courses have real-world applications; fieldtrips, especially to partner sites such as Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty; Advanced Placement Classes: As we expand, we plan to offer Art History, Environmental Science, European History, Studio Art; 2-D Design, and Studio Art: 3-D Design. Online Advanced Placement Classes: As we expand, we plan to offer Art History, Chemistry, European History, Studio Art: 2-D Design, Studio Art: 3-D Design. Current afterschool programs include: Art Club, Student Government, Yearbook Club, Anime Club, Peer Mediators, JV Basketball, Baseball, Softball ELLs receive information regarding all school programs through advisory, just like their General Education peers. There are ELLs currently on the soccer team, visual arts club, and student government organization. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All rooms are wireless with Internet capabilities. Ipad minis are used as digital white boards. Dry erase boards and dry erase markers are provided for class discussion. Algebra Tiles for manipulatives. Voice recognition software is used to help ELLs with oral comprehension. All books have native language translations as needed. ENL support from the ENL teacher is used when translating notes and lectures during ER periods (small group instruction). Google Read and Write, Translator, Brain Pop, and Rosettana Stone are applications that help Newcomer and Developing ELLs in all core subjects, especially ELA and Social Studies. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher speaks two languages (English and Spanish), which allows for informal use of Spanish during ENL class. Interest surveys, home language questionnaires, and cultural activities are used to support home language knowledge. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Teachers, staff, and administration meet during grade team meetings to ensure that ELLs receive services and materials at a high school level. ELLs are then supported by our scaffolded resources as needed. The ENL teacher meets with two Special Education Teachers biweekly to brainstorm differentiation strategies. The ENL teacher also gains feedback from administrators and grade team pedagogues on how to continue supporting ELLs in the 9 th, 10 th, and 11 th grade. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All rooms are wireless with internet capabilites. Ipad minis are used as digital white boards. Dry erase boards and dry erase markers are provided for class discussion. Algebra Tiles for manipulatives. Voice recognition software is used to help ELLs with oral comprehension. All books have native language translations as needed. ENL support from the ENL teacher is used when translating notes and lectures during ER periods (small group instruction). Google Read and Write, Translator, Brain Pop, and Rosettana Stone are applications that help Newcomer and Developing ELLs in all core subjects, especially ELA and Social Studies. 2018-19 CEP 53  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent and student meetings with Principal, AP, ENL teacher and grade level team are planned for the first month of school. Individual student programs are made based on the parent's survey, teacher observation and results of the previous year's NYSESLAT. Most students entered Mather High School with Advanced level ESL designation on the NYSESLAT. All incoming Freshmen go to an overnight Freshman Kickoff to help reinforce social skills. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As a second year school, we are still deciding on language electives to offer. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher and content teachers who instruct ELLs attend weekly team meetings and department meetings to help increase skills and knowledge based in ENL instruction. Our Instructional Coach and ENL teacher are planning an Instructing and Supporting ELLs workshop for all staff members, including all content teachers, guidance counselors, secretaries, special education teachers, speech therapists, and parent coordinators. The workshop will take place in November 2015. The ENL teacher will attend a NYSESLAT training in the Spring of 201G and turnkey testing procedures to the staff in April of 2016. Working with our network, our teachers are working on specific reading and writing skills that further open access (to the learning) to all our students, plus we are implementing the Hochman writing strategy for all students. Our entire currciulum is built on Common Core and we use mastery-based grading. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 9th grade students who are identified as ELL are given mentors (ENL or otherwise) to help transition them into high school. All students are also assigned an adult advisor to help with academic advisement for the year. Guidance Counselors are encouraged to attend professional development courses through our network. ENL teachers are allowed to take their additional professional development courses through UFT or in partnership with our network. Classes in curriculum development, ENL instruction as well as Special Education theory are taken by our ENL and other teachers as part of our professional development strand. The ENL teacher has attended intervisitation development through the network and an online Translation Services workshop. Agendas of professional development are maintained by the main office and the ENL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 54  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have a new Parents Association with presently no ENL parents participating. However, both PA presidents speak Spanish, and all events and meetings have Spanish translators present. The ENL teacher contacts the parents of ELLs in their preferred language at the beginning of the year to discuss language development progress and any assessment results of individual students. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Annual individual meetings with ELL parents are recorded on a phone call log that is maintained by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher documents any parent needs on the phone call log. 3. All ELL parents are invited to come to Parent Night on 10/1/15. They are also encouraged to take part in the Parent Association and the School Leadership Team. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Larry Gabbard, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mather Bldng Arts & Crftsmnshp School DBN: 02M139 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Larry D. Gabbard Title Principal Christopher Mayer Assistant Principal Lorraine Marshall Parent Coordinator Arlene Burgher ENL/Bilingual Teacher Otto Starzman Parent Emily Williams Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Christina Martini School Counselor Fred Walsh Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 2018-19 CEP 57 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: ST Mather Bldng Arts & Crftmnshp HS Superintendent: Fred Walsh DBN: 02M139 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yvette Arlene Dobarganes Burgher Teacher Teacher Yes No Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language-related information is obtained from our Home Language Survey, blue emergency cards, relevant ATS reports and from meeting with our parents during our Freshman Orientation, Open School Night and Parent-Teacher Conferences. The Principal, AP and/or grade-level team leader also meets with every new incoming student and their parents who are identified as needing ELL support. The entrance interview allows us to identify additional supports such as translation services as well as additional programs for students who need more support in language acquisition. Furthermore, running an RHLA report on ATS allows us to regularly check the languages that parents speak, by class and by grade. School personnel are able to translate Spanish, our predominate other than English language. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Bambara French Haitian Creole Japanese Mandinka English Spanish 2 4 2 2 5 3 1 2 368 210 .33 .67 .33 .33 .83 .5 .17 .33 61.44 35.06 2 4 2 2 5 3 1 2 368 210 .33 .67 .33 .33 .83 .5 .17 .33 61.44 35.06 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome Letters Lunch Forms Welcome Forms/Contact Information Collection Forms September September September Various Letters throughout the year Various throughout year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These are translated by Ms. Marshall Already Translated These are translated by Ms. Marshall (these are all standard forms used for the past three years, and are modified over the summer for the fall) Any letters that are to distributed that need to be translated are translated by Ms. Marshall (Family Coordinator) or 2018-19 CEP 59  Promotion in Doubt Letters February Progress Reports June November February March June and As Needed Summer School Notification June Ms. Dobarganes teacher. These include celebration notices, field trip slips, happenings at Mather, and DOE distributed letters These are translated through an automated translation program and corrected/checked by Ms. Marshall and Ms. Dobarganes These are translated through an automated translation program and corrected/checked by Ms. Marshall and Ms. Dobarganes These are translated through an automated translation program and corrected/checked by Ms. Marshall and Ms. Dobarganes 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Student-Led Conferences 11/9/17 Student-Led Conferences 3/27/18 Back-to-School Night Family Night 9/28/17 5/15/18 interpretation service(s)? We hire interpretation services based on a request by the parents and their appointment time. We hire interpretation services based on a request by the parents and their appointment time. Interpretation services are hired for the night and we use on-staff people Interpretation services are hired for the night and we use on-staff people 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we would first send out emails and automated calls recorded by us predominantly in Spanish and English. For the individual students whose parents need assistance, we would communicate through the studnet or use the call-in school tranlators. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be sent to trainings yearly offered by he Translation and Interpretation Unit for language access requirements contained in the regulation and on resources available to support these requirements. Our teachers who are the Leads will attend yearly webinars for interpretation services. At the beginning of the school year, the leads will turnkey the procedures for interpretation services to the Community Associate and Business Manager and to grade team leaders and the school so that the entire staff will be aware of translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Posters are posted in front of the school as well as in our hallways and a sign indicated translation services are available and posted in the main office. Bill of Rights and Parent's Guide to Language Access Written are sent home in our first day packet. Along with the home language survey, a PA survey is included for parents to complete about their language translation needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents through parent surveys at the beginning of the school year, outreach to parents through our advisors, and informal meetings with parents during events such as Family Night. Most parents who require translation services have a good rapport with the Community Associate and reach out to her with needs, concerns, and questions. The Parent Association will schedule a focus group of parents to gather feedback and best practices on interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 61 
