2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M145 School Name: P.S. 145, THE BLOOMINGDALE SCHOOL Principal: NATALIA RUSSO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 145M 310300010145 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 03M145 150 West 105 th Street , NY, NY 10025 212-678-2857 212-222-4610 Phone Number: Dr. Natalia Russo Fax: nrusso10@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Dr. Natalia Russo Frank Lentini MarielaAngulo/Anastasia Rashkova Sonia Lorenzi Mia Simring - - - District Information Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street, New York, NY 10025 ialtschul@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5897 Phone Number: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th Floor Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-339-1590 Phone Number: 212-356-7546 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Natalia Russo Frank Lentini AnastasiaRashkova LeydaCruz - - Rae Mercado AraceliFlores *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anna Zicer Sonia Lorenzi Kristina Sergeev Thelma Calvo Olga Iliachenko SorybelZabala - - - Member/Parent Staff- SLT Chair Staff Staff Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that technology innovation is part of the foundation of a 21st century model of teaching and learning. We use a blend of face-to-face and online teaching and learning, communication and collaboration. We strive to build global awareness, teamwork, problem-solving and presentation skills to improve reading comprehension, oral reading fluency and overall achievement. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 145, The Bloomingdale School is an Elementary school with 379 students from PK through grade 5. We use technology to help our students develop 21st century literacy skills for children in Pre-K through 5th grade. Some of our partnerships include: YMCA– a national organization which provides our students in Grades K– 5 a free 3-hour program after the school day ends. The program includes academic, enrichment and athletic components. Studio in School – a national organization which teaches visual arts to hundreds of thousands of New York City children in under-served public schools. Wellness in the Schools - an organization which inspires healthy eating, environmental awareness and fitness as a way of life for kids in public schools. Through meaningful public/private partnerships with school leadership, teachers, chefs, coaches, parents and kids, WITS develops and implements programs that provide healthy foods, healthy environments and opportunities for regular play to help kids learn and grow. Both PS 145 and West Prep Academy (our co-located school) have partnered with WITS to make our West 105th Street Magnet Campus a healthy place for all children. New York Road Runners - an organization which provides Young Runners for free to all New York City public schools. It is also available for free to youth clubs and before- and after-school programs in underserved communities. YR uses a team-based structure to help kids learn valuable lessons about how to set goals and make activity part of their daily lives. With the help of their coaches, students learn to run distances from 1 to 4 miles. While physically challenging, the Young Runners program is designed for children of all fitness and athletic levels in grades 3-12. Yogurtland – a local retail store which provides students on a monthly basis free ice cream for excellent attendance. The school wide attendance has increased by 3% since the 2014-2015 school year. PS 145 is also committed to the development of communication skills, specifically through the Arts. We have a full-time Music teacher and a full-time Dance teacher who help provide our students with a well-rounded education. We 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  are committed to providing our students with ample opportunities to help them learn what their interests are and help them harness the skills they all have within them. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school population comprises 27% Black, 63% Hispanic, 7% White, and 3% Asian students. The student body includes 13% English language learners and 19% special education students. Boys account for 50% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2014 - 2015 was 94%. Most notably, we also have 10% students living in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The instructional focus at our school is to regularly examine student data to identify the needs of our students to adjust instructional practices to improve achievement and progress. Teacher teams have been created to examine student work on a weekly basis in order to adjust instruction. The use of a Google Drive has served to monitor the analysis of student work. We are working to know our students more in-depth to meet them at their entry point and move them towards mastery. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M145 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 391 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 22 21 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 78.5% % Reduced Lunch 13.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 59.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.95 3% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 61% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 28 30 89.5% 1.0% 24.0% 25.6% 2.3% 2.0% 2 3% 6.3 23.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X - - Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Literacy curriculum was examined across all grades for English Language Arts instruction and adjustments were made to daily instruction to include the implementation of Guided Reading. Although the performance on the NYS Spring 2018 assessments indicate a low level of student proficiency, there was growth among all students in all grades on both the ELA and Mathematics exams. Most notable were the gains made by female students. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will build upon these gains with further refinements to the Literacy curriculum and also similar modifications will be made to the Mathematics curriculum. The adjustments are all to develop rigorous instruction, professional development, academic intervention, parental engagement, and strong leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  By June 2019, through the implementation of our curriculum modification process to improve scaffolds and supports for students, there will be a 5% increase in proficiency on the 2019 NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom teachers will improve their ability to implement the Common Core Standards in both ELA and Mathematics with the use of curriculum maps, guidance from supervisors and staff developers, intervisitations, grade conferences, and professional development sessions. All classroom teachers September- May Supervisors, staff developers, network support Academic intervention specialists will provide intensive small group instruction to students with materials that support the Common Core Identified students in grades 1-5 October – May Parental involvement activities will be planned and conducted to better inform and engage parents in the learning process, the Common Core Standards, and strategies for success Professional development activities will be designed and conducted to enable teachers to better engage students, to develop critical thinking, and to share best practices All teachers, September- Parent Coordinator June All teachers October-May Response to Intervention (SPIRE program) will provide intensive remediation to students reading below grade level in grades K-2 to strengthen their skills for subsequent grades. Identified students in Grades K-2 September- June F status teachers, staff developer, ESL teacher, Special Ed coordinator Supervisors, grade leaders, staff developer, parent engagement team Supervisors, staff developer, professional development team IEP Teacher, Supervisors, SpEd Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home via monthly workshops regarding the various content areas and disciplines. The parent coordinator in collaboration with various teachers will plan for a workshop the first Friday morning every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a full time staff developer, F-status teachers, a professional development team, a parent/family engagement team, and after school instructors. Supplemental instructional resources are needed to assist high needs and at-risk students to better understand and master the common core standards. It will be necessary to develop and implement a schedule of academic-intervention services for students who are identified as at-risk. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark By January 31, 2019, through the implementation of our curriculum modification process to improve scaffolds and supports for students, there will be a 2.5% increase in proficiency on the NYC CCLS Aligned Performance Series Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA Performance Series Exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X - X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Current data, which includes NYS achievement scores, MOSL’s, and school benchmark assessments, indicates the need to make the items listed below priorities for the 2018-2019 school year : • To increase the number of students who are proficient in ELA; • To increase the number of students who are proficient in mathematics; • To increase the fluency level of students with disabilities and English Language Learners; • To provide all teachers with professional development in the implementation of the common core curriculum; and • To provide all students with multiple opportunities for achievement and success all areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the K-5 implementation of the Mutt-i-grees Social Emotional Curriculum there will be a 10% increase (from 60% to 70%) in the Supportive Environment-Classroom Behavior Section of the NYC Schools Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A school wide attendance initiative will acknowledge daily, monthly, and semester attendance rates for all classes and individual students with awards (Blue Apron), announcements, and incentives. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students September- Administration, Parent Association, June ATS secretary October- Administration, May F-status teachers, A school wide academic intervention program will provide students with supplementary activities to better develop and reinforce skills and concepts contained in the common core standards. Identified high needs and at-risk An after school academic program (YMCA) will offer students additional time to learn and master the curriculum. students YMCA BOKS, CHAMPS, Dance Troop, and Backstagers are programs which hold participating students accountable for their behavior and should reduce the number of incidents All participating students October - June Administration, Coach, Afterschool Teachers A comprehensive arts in education program will be conducted to provide all students with multiple opportunities to explore develop their talents. All students September- Administration, June Cluster Teachers, Studio-in-a-School 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home via monthly workshops regarding the various content areas and disciplines. The parent coordinator in collaboration with various teachers will plan for a workshop the first Friday morning every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a full time staff developer, F-status teachers, a professional development team, a parent/family engagement team, after school instructors, and an artist in residence. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Supplemental instructional resources for the after school program are needed to better develop and reinforce skills and concepts that are a part of the common core curriculum. A schedule of parental/family engagement activities will be created and implemented. A schedule of Awards Assemblies will be established and conducted. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, through the K-5 implementation of the Mutt-i-grees Social Emotional Curriculum there will be a 5% increase in a school created survey aligned to the Supportive Environment-Classroom Behavior Section of the NYC Schools Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X - - 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of most current data, which includes NYS achievement scores, School Quality Review, and the School Quality Snapshot, the focus of the school leadership for the 2017-2018 school year is as follows: To develop the systematic use of school wide assessment practices to determine appropriate and timely next steps for improved student achievement. Current assessments practices indicate the need to better share information about individual student progress and better develop multiple strategies for mastery of skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23 By June 2019, through our various teacher team structures for reflection and collaboration, there will be a 10% increase in the Collaborative Teacher - Innovation and Collective Responsibility section of the NYC Schools. Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of a multi-tiered data team that plans for the examination of multiple sources of data that is aligned to the school wide assessment calendar. Creation of a school wide data analysis schedule which outlines the sources which are used to determine students' level of progress and/or mastery. Implementation of a color-coded accountability system to monitor the teachers' ongoing curriculum adjustments. Purple for adjustments resulting from data inquiry work, green for adjustments resulting from professional development, and red for SWD, ELL, and higher performing student modifications. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) K-5 Teachers September- Supervisors, May Staff Developer K-5 Teachers September- Administration, June Staff Developer, K-5 Teachers September- Administration, Team Members June Staff Developer, Team Members Administration, Data Team Members Teachers will fill out and disseminate individual student reports to parents and also create class data sheets K-5 Teachers September-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the beginning of the school year in September, our school will hold a Meet the Staff Night during which parent-teacher communication structures are outlined for all families. They are advised to the various mediums of communication that exist to have staff communicate with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a staff developer, a professional development team, teacher teams, and all faculty members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, through our various teacher team structures for reflection and collaboration, there will be a 6% increase in a mid-year survey aligned to the Collaborative Teacher - Innovation and Collective Responsibility section of the NYC Schools. Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas for Professional Development Sessions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). - X X - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of most current data, which includes NYS achievement scores, School Quality Review, and the School Quality Snapshot, the focus of the school leadership for the 2017-2018 school year is as follows: To monitor the impact and effectiveness of the professional development, feedback and discipline team work that will lead to an increase in the quality of instruction and student achievement. The indicators outlined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching will be utilized to both assess and provide feedback to teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration and teacher leaders will design professional development cycles on utilizing data and formative assessments resulting in an increase of 5% in level of proficiency in Danielson Component 3d, as measured by Advance from 2.78 to 2.9. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Creation of a comprehensive professional development plan that targets the needs of all teachers. K-5 Teachers September- Administration, June Staff Developer, Professional Development Team Creation of a curriculum mapping team to identify the modifications necessary to meet the students diverse learning needs. K-5 Teachers September- Supervisors, May Implementation of a curriculum analysis process that allows for ongoing teacher input and feedback regarding students' needs, which will lead to effective curriculum mapping K-5 Teachers October- June To monitor the implementation of modification approaches and engagement strategies, provided to teachers by leadership and staff developers, which are aligned to the school's instructional focus. K-5 Teachers October- June Changes in curriculum maps and assessments used will be tracked from year to year K-5 Teachers August - June Staff Developer Administrators, Staff Developer, Grade Leaders Administrators, Staff Developer Administration, Staff Developer, Curriculum Mapping Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership in order to support their children at home via monthly workshops regarding the various content areas and disciplines. The parent coordinator in collaboration with various teachers will plan for a workshop the first Friday morning every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a full time staff developer, a professional development team, a parent/family engagement team, teacher teams, and all faculty members. Teacher teams will identify and administer benchmark assessments to better identify the needs of students. Dual Language team will identify and administer benchmark assessments to better identify the needs of the students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, administration and teacher leaders will design professional development cycles on utilizing data and formative assessments resulting in an increase of 3% in level of proficiency in Danielson Component 3d, in which the whole school will average a score of 2.84. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Color-coded Programming Schedule and attendance Sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X - X - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The current Elementary School Snapshot indicates that 91% of parents are satisfied with the education their child has received at the school, and that 90% of parents believe that the school offers a wide variety of extracurricular activities and services, percentages that closely mirror both citywide and district averages. With a number of faculty members who are a part of the school community, and a diligent Parent Coordinator, a strong partnerships exists between the school and the parents. There is, however, the need to better engage parents and equip them with the information they need for their children to be successful. Attendance at parent workshops last year averaged 10% of parents invited; attendance increased to more than 75% with activities that included performances by students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31 By June 2019, there will be an 5% increase (from 92% to 97%) in parents/guardian who respond positively to the Parental Involvement section to Parents in the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Parental/Family Engagement Plan will be created to provide parents and guardians multiple opportunities for involvement. All parents September- June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers A partnership with Wellness in the Schools (WITS) was created to provide community members with opportunities to learn about proper nutrition and fitness and collaborate with West Prep during parent breakfasts Parents and students September- Administration, June WITS personnel Newsletters will be distributed on a monthly basis to all parents; they will contain individualized information about each students’ progress in both ELA and Mathematics The Parent Coordinator and Staff Developer will conduct bi-weekly workshops for parents to keep them informed about school policy, curriculum matters, and how to better work with their children at home All parents October- Administration, June All classroom teachers All parents September- Principal, June Staff Developer Parents will be invited to monthly field trips, monthly publishing parties/ gallery walks, and special events (e.g., Dads' Day, Grandparents' Day) All family members and students September-June The school will hold a career day event where parents will be invited to talk to students about what they do for a living All family members February-March The school app will be implemented and administration, PA, and all teachers will use it to communicate with families via regular alerts All parents September - June Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator, All Classroom Teachers Administration, guidance counselor, 3-5 Classroom Teachers Administration, PA, All classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  YMCA Wellness in the Schools Studio in a School American Ballet Theater Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a full time staff developer, a parent coordinator, an ATS secretary, a parent/family engagement team, teacher teams, and personnel from Wellness in the Schools. Parents will be provided with supplemental instructional materials at workshops and meetings. A schedule of parental/family engagement activities will be created and implemented. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019 there will be a 95% positive response (increase of 3%) in a midyear survey which measures parents attitudes towards PS 145's Parental involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal survey which mirrors the the "Parental Involvement" section of the NYC School Survey Results which will be administered during Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 4th & 5th Grade: Level 1 on the ELA State Test 3rd Grade: Low 30% on the September ELA Baseline Assessment 4th & 5th Grade: Level 1 on the Math State Test 3rd Grade: Low 30% on the September Math Baseline Assessment 4th & 5th Grade: Level 1 on the ELA State Test 3rd Grade: Low 30% on the September ELA Baseline Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Focused Reading Intervention by TCR; Levels 2,3,4 Explicit Instruction; modeling; guided practice; repeated readings; use of graphic organizers & templates; guided writing instruction Focused Reading Intervention by TCR; Levels 2,3,4 Explicit Instruction; modeling; guided practice; repeated readings; use of graphic organizers & templates; guided writing instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group (6-8 students) During the school day 3 times a week 45 minute period Small group (6-8 students) During the school day 2 times a week 45 minute period Small group (6-8 students) During the school day 3 times a week 45 minute period 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Social Studies 4th & 5th Grade: Level 1 on the ELA State Test Focused Reading Intervention by TCR; Levels 2,3,4 3rd Grade: Low 30% on the September ELA Baseline Assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified for AIS are identified within the weekly IST meeting which is a multi-disciplinary meeting. Explicit Instruction; modeling; guided practice; repeated readings; use of graphic organizers & templates; guided writing instruction Counseling: Pre-referral strategies for a period of six weeks are provided by counselor, teacher writes anecdotes of interventions to counselor. 2) Speech and language: Therapist provides a screening of student after receiving parental consent through short assessment and teacher questionnaire. Provision of findings is reported to teacher and parents. 3) Occupational Therapy: Observation of student in the classroom setting is done by therapist once parental consent is received. 4) Physical Therapy: Pre-referral strategies for a period of six to eight weeks are provided to teacher by therapist. Anecdotals are provided by Small group (6-8 students) During the school day 3 times a week 45 minute period During the school day Counseling : Parent is contacted. At this point counselor can determine if an FBA and BIP are needed. Counselor provides therapy at risk in small group or individual. Counselor determines if student needs to be referred for special education evaluation. 2)Speech and language: Referral strategies for a period of six to eight weeks are provided by therapist, teacher provides progress documentation to speech therapist to determine if a full evaluation is needed. 3) Occupational Therapy: Recommendations by provider to teacher as to strategies for a period of six weeks. Teacher will provide documentation of pre-referral strategies. If there is no progress, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  teacher to physical therapist to determine progress. occupational therapist will refer student for a full evaluation. 4) Physical Therapy: If no progress is noted, physical therapist will refer for a full evaluation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 43 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, school supplies, medical services, vision screening, academic intervention services, special education services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). - 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  - 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. - 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A collaboration exists between both Hunter College and NYU’s School of Education for the purpose of Student Teacher Placement and the recruitment of certified teachers. The school encourages and provides opportunities for both internal and external professional development to all faculty members. The Network Support team offers additional support in this area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A comprehensive Professional Development plan was created to provide all faculty members with multiple opportunities to extend their professional growth. The principal is a part of both the CSD 3 Principal Focus Group and the Feedback Focus Group which provides extended learning opportunities to new administrators. The Manhattan Borough Field Support Center provides additional opportunities for the Assistant Principal and resource personnel. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). The Parent coordinator, and the Pre-kindergarten family worker collaborate with the pre-kindergarten teachers to assist the parents in the transition process. This includes home visitations, individualized conferences, workshops, and the dissemination of information necessary for parents to make informed choices. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A professional development team was established to assist in the creation of a professional development plan for the school year. Grade leaders along with the Literacy Consultant and the Math Staff Developer are a part of the process in the identification of assessment materials and their use. Monthly meetings are used to look at student work and inform the next steps for instruction in the classroom. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 8,11,14,16,19,21 - - 8,21 8,19,21 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 188,395.00 - - 86,996.00 11,200.00 x - - x x 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 1,950,533.00 - - - - 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 145 The Bloomingdale School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 145 The Bloomingdale School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  P.S. 145 The Bloomingdale School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Materials will be provided to support literacy and math enrichment as well as language and vocabulary acquisition and development. Fountas & Pinnell assessment kits have been purchased to determined the Spanish reading level of ELLs in our Spanish dual language program. Given the importance of providing consistent, coherent, high quality and rigorous instruction to our second language learners, we will create a Saturday Language Academy. Based on current data, this program will provide students with supplemental instruction in ENL/ELA. Additionally, this program will focus on increasing English language acquisition specifically through the development of concept formation, content area academic vocabulary, improving literacy skills (both in reading and writing). Based on the results of the most recent NYSESLAT data, students consistently need to improve in the areas of reading and writing in order to reach the next language level. Many of our ELLs remain at the Expanding level, unable to reach proficient due to these two sections. In addition, based on 2016 ELA and Math test data, there is need for academic support for ELLs. The after school program will meet for 18 sessions over 9 weeks from 3:00pm to 5:00pm from January 11 - March 16. The after school academy will serve 30 students in Grades 3 (three) through 5 (five.) The targeted population will include those students in grades 3 through 5 who are mandated English Language Learners and students who tested out on the NYSESLAT in the last two years. The language of instruction will be English. An ENL/ bilingual teachers will be responsible for the instructional component. The teachers instruct during 60 minutes blocks to provide language support for the different groups. Instructional planning design will be based on student entry points with an emphasis on individual areas of improvement. Lessons will include both a language and content component to ensure 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information comprehension. Teachers will utilize a variety of ENL techniques and materials. Materials to be used will be: Learning A-Z. Instruction will be delivered in whole and small group strategy sessions, co-teaching (station model) and a pull out/push ENL model with the ENL and bilingual teacher spending 60 minutes in each classroom. Teachers will consistently look at student work to monitor and assess student progress, inform instruction, and design differentiation. Teachers will employ pedagogical best practices to engage students in meaningful learning opportunities. 21st Technology tools will be integrated into all instructional sessions. There will need to be a supervisor during the after school, in order to organize, maintain, and monitor the instructional integrity and consistency of the program. He/she will need to ensure smooth arrivals and dismissal, monitor instruction, and keep track of attendance. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Literacy Support Systems provides Dual Language Teachers ENL classroom strategies to support and accelerate English language acquisition in all classrooms. Some topics include: The Intersection of Reading Workshop and English Language Instruction: Using Reading to Teach Language and Vice Versa. Thinking Across the Year with an Eye to Supporting English Language Learners, Incorporating Language Goals and Vocabulary Development, Making Plans that Support ELLS across Units of Study. The scheduled dates for the Supporting your ELLs in Literacy are as follows: December 5, 2016 January 9, 2017 February 6, 2017 Monthly In-School Professional Development opportunities for teachers with ENLs occur on a weekly basis through our literacy consultant and math staff developer. Topics include: Instructional Expectations for ELL Students, Assessments and grading for ELL Students, Text Complexity and Academic Language, RTI, Close Reading, Strategies to Improve Student Writing, Using Technology tools in the Classroom, Universal Design for Learning. Workshop offerings through the Office of English Language Learners for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Dual Language, ENL and classroom teachers will be attended by our ENL teacher and turn-keyed to the rest of our staff at the monthly PD meeting workshops. Inter visitations to other dual language programs in the city have been scheduled for our teachers to observe best practices. Teachers with dual certification who teach grades on 3 through five will be involved in the Saturday Academy. They will receive professional learning during the one hour and ten minute teacher PD on the Monday prior to the program start. ENL pedagogy is scheduled for the fourth Monday every month. Teachers will review ENL and language acquisition instructional strategies as well as align language and content instructional goals. The ENL teacher has been secured to work with students who have limited English proficiency. The scheduled dates for the Supporting your ELLs in Literacy are as follows: December 5, 2016 January 9, 2017 February 6, 2017 Teachers are provided with opportunities to turn key all relevant information with appropriate staff members during afternoon professional learning time. Throughout the year during professional conference days and during monthly grade conference and teacher team meetings, all teachers participate in school based professional development focusing on common core standards -based instruction and Depth of Knowledge as a tool for rigorous instruction and conceptual understanding. These PD opportunities help support teachers plan differentiated instruction, as they enable teachers to keep in mind the end goals for students as indicated by the New York State Standards. The administration has blocked out common planning time for all dual language and ENL teachers to be able to meet and discuss strategies that target the needs of ELLs. This common planning time occurs Friday mornings. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: independent independent At PS 145M, parents have multiple opportunities to strengthen the school/home connection. A variety of parent workshops are offered, Understanding the new Common Core Learning Standards and the Implications for Instruction, Literacy and Assessments, and The Components of Balanced Literacy. Parents of ELLs will be provided with 2 hour training sessions on the use of Learning A-Z. to be used at home or at the library for independent work with students. All communication is translated as necessary. Information is communicated as follows: Backpacked home with students, via email, by phone messenger system, and can be found in school newsletters, PTA News and website, as well as Parent Coordinator correspondences. For the Afterschool Academy - Parents will be invited to an orientation meeting outlining the goals of the program. During one session, parents will be invited to visit and observe instruction. The parent workshops are scheduled on the following Fridays at 8:30 AM: November 18, 2016 January 20, 2017 March 3, 2017 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Bloomingdale School Borough Manhattan School Number 145 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Natalia Russo Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Mrs. Loushonda Mack Coach type here School Counselor Miguel Marquez Parent type here Parent Coordinator Carlos Salamanca Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 322 Total number of ELLs 48 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.91% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English/Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 145 we use Fountas and Pinnell to accress the early literary skills of all our students, ELLs included. This data helps teachers to determine the student's reading fluency and reading comprehension. This information allows teachers to better plan lessons and activities that will meet students individualized needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers take into consideration the theory that it takes 1-2 years to develop BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) and 5-7 years even up to 10 years to acquire CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). This information is a constant reminder when evaluating and assessing the success of our ELLs. Various activities that are taken into consideration with ELLs include: - Communicating/participating in whole class instruction in the TL - English. - Improvement in language levell from NYSITELL to NYSESLAT or last year's NYSESLAT to current year. -Overall work and portfolio review. - Adminstration reviews AYP to see if we have met our goals. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. When a new student registers at P.S. 145 and is suspected of being a language learner due to their HLIS and interview in English and HL, they are administered the NYSITELL which helps to determine their language level and best educational setting. The students' performance levels vary dramatically due to their prior educational experiences. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped by language level and grade band: 1). Entering/Emerging K-2 2). Entering/Emerging 3-5 3). Expanding/Transitioning K-2 4). Expanding/Transitioning 3-5 b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Students are placed in heterogenous groups to balance the language proficiency ratio. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are seen in various language levels. ESL teacher works closely with other classroom schedules including specials - gym, dance, music, art, and related services including OT/PT, Speech, and SETTS. A). ENL instruction is delivered to students through combination of freestanding ESL instruction (pull out) and push in. While ELA instructional minutes are covered during push in and with ESL teacher works closely with classroom teachers to assist with instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL --> Core content is delivered through ESL teacher using ESL strategies to identify language objectives that align with content/learning objectives. DL --> Language is alternated daily: Mon/Wed/Fri morning - English. Tuesday/Thursday/Fri afternoon - Spanish. Visuals and used in both programs and teacher uses mulitple intelligences to target all learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs whose home language is Spanish and in DL take the ELE Spanish exam at the end of the school year. Throughout the year DL teachers constantly assess students in HL through informal assessments, projects, portfolio reviews. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) SIFE - Welcoming student, allowing for culture shock and a period of adjustment. Use previous educational experience to help use as a course of action. Allow student to intergrate into whole class community when ready. b). Newcomer - Develop basic phonemic awareness including letter and sound recognition. Encourage to participate in whole classroom instruction as they become more and more confident working in small group instruction. c). Developing - Build on basic skills, moving towards developing reading comprehension and writing skills. d). Long Term - N/A (Grades K-5) e). Former ELLs - 90 minutes of ELA/ENL support along with 2 years of testing modifications. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELLs who have IEPs are provided scaffolded instruction, multiple visuals and other multisensory activities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL teacher reads all IEPs of ELL-SWDs and works with classroom teacher and other related services providers to ensure lesson plans and activities fit their individual needs in an effort to not only attain English proficiency but reach their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ELLs are selected for a 6 week cycle of AIS which are provided in two distinct areas: ELA and Mathematics. After the cycle is finished, students are assessed and it is determined whether they continue receiving services or if the services are discontinued. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Both monolingual and biilngual classes have been outfitted with new appropriately leveled libraries. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including ELLs are afforded equal access to both the local YMCA afterschool program and Afterschool All Stars Program. Both are housed in the P.S. 145/West Prep Campus. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Spanish language libraries, lap tops and iPads. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? TBA - N/A ENL - English is used for all instruction. Occassionally, if possible, ESL teacher will incorporate HL to break down core content instruction to better assist student's comprehension of topic. DL - Language instruction differs by days: Monday/Wednesday/Friday mornings - English. Tuesday/Thursday/Friday afternoons - Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. There are bi-monthly check ins with the Instructional Support team to track the progress of students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Spanish language libraries, lap tops and iPads. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent Coordinator provides open house and school tours to all parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  a). Self-contained. EPs and ELLs are intergrated all day, each day. b). English and Spanish c). Language is separated by days: Mondays/Wednesdays/Friday mornings - English while Tuesdays/Thursdays/Friday afternoons are in Spanish. d). Both languages are taught at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teacher attends various ESL related PDs throughout the school year. As well, the ESL teacher provides PDs to all staff throughout the year in an effort to allow all staff to understand how ELLs are identified and what are some strategies that can be used with their ELLs. The ESL teacher attends monthly PDs for District 3 teachers of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. How to work with parents through the middle school application process. Explaining to parents/caregivers the best options/schools for the specific needs of their child. Identifying to parents/caregivers the immediate difference with elementary to middle school and how that might affect the child. All teachers attend Monday afternoon professional development sessions. Througout the school year, ESL teacher attends day long professional development sessions specifically regarding ESL topics. This also applies to bilingual education teachers. Teachers provide attendance to principal and school secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ESL teacher is constant communication with parents. Parents are updated on all exams, programs, ELL outisde opportunities including additional tutoring in English. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Back to School night - allows parents/caregivers to meet teachers and understand the work that their child will be involved in. Parent Teacher Tuesday Engagement - weekly opportunity to keep parent/caregiver up to date on what the child is doing, what strategies can also be done in the home. Any outside ELL tutoring/additional practice, ex: local library. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Natalia Russo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 03M145 School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Natalia Russo Title Principal Mrs. Loushonda Mack Assistant Principal Carlos Salamanca Parent Coordinator Melanie Diaz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Miguel Marquez School Counselor Ilene Altschul Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M145 School Name: PS 145 The Bloomingdale School Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carlos Salamanca Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 2. ATS reports 3. Student Emergency Contact cards 4. Surveys conducted by your school 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Estonian French Japanese English Russian Spanish Urdu 2 4 1 3 1 1 1 295 7 76 1 0.051 1.02 0.26 0.77 0.26 0.26 0.26 75.26 1.79 19.39 0.26 2 3 1 3 0 0 1 293 7 79 3 0.51 0.77 0.26 0.77 0 0 0.26 74.74 1.79 20.15 0.77 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bi-monthly newsletters October, December, February, April, June School aide translates to Spanish (usually update of previous year's documents) Meet the Staff Night Flyer September 2017 Russian Dual Language Coordinator translates to Russian School aide translates to Spanish (usually update of previous year's documents) Russian Dual Language Coordinator translates to Russian 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences November 2017 and March 2018 Fifth Grade Graduation Letter January 2018 School aide translates to Spanish (usually update of previous year's documents) Russian Dual Language Coordinator translates to Russian School aide translates to Spanish (usually update of previous year's documents) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the Staff Night September 2017 Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences November 2017 and March 2018 Student Showcase Night May 2018 interpretation service(s)? We have speakers of Spanish, Russian, Albanian, Cantonese and Arabic on our staff. The other languages, teachers have been provided with the translation services information to call and request assistance on the phone. We have speakers of Spanish, Russian, Albanian, Cantonese and Arabic on our staff. The other languages, teachers have been provided with the translation services information to call and request assistance on the phone. We have speakers of Spanish, Russian, Albanian, Cantonese and Arabic on our staff. The other languages, teachers have been provided with the translation services information to call and request assistance on the phone. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have speakers of Spanish, Russian, Albanian, Cantonese and Arabic on our staff. The other languages, staff has been provided with the translation services information to call and request assistance on the phone. Also, PS 145 has a school app that we send out survey to the entire school community. The content on the school app can be translated to over 25 different languages thereby making it accessible to family members of virtually every nationality we have. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During faculty conferences, staff member will be made aware of the Chancellor's regulations and the resources we have made available to assist them to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have speakers of Spanish, Russian, Albanian, Cantonese and Arabic on our staff. The other languages, staff have been provided with the translation services information to call and request assistance on the phone. Multilingual signage is also posted throughout the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 145 has a school app that we send out survey to the entire school community. The content on the school app can be translated to over 25 different languages thereby making it accessible to family members of virtually every nationality we have. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 
