2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M152 School Name: P.S. 152 DYCKMAN VALLEY Principal: JULIA PIETRI 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 152M 310600010152 PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 School Number (DBN): 06M152 93 NAGLE AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10040 (212) 567-5456 Phone Number: (212) 942-6319 Fax: JULIA PIETRI JPietri@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: JULIA PIETRI ANNE BISHOP MARIDALIA MARTE ANNE BISHOP LeidySantana N/A/ ALONDRAGARCIA District Information Geographical District: 06 MANUEL RAMIREZ Superintendent: 4360 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, NY, 1003 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRamirez@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917) 521-3757 Phone Number: (917) 521-3797 Fax: MANHATTAN Field Support Center (FSC) YUET CHU FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 TH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 705-5856 Phone Number: (212) 356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Julia Pietri Annie Bishop Maria Marte(Maridalia) Herminia Perello LeidySAntana N/A N/A ALONDRAGARCIA CrystalDavis GabriellaPentrelli Rosa Cruz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher UFTgrades PK-2 Member/ Teacher UFTgrades 3-5 Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LeidySantana Melody Cabral Guadalupe Anco Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 152M – The Dyckman Valley School of Innovation in a Global Community is a newly formed Magnet School. We're an elementary Pre-K to 5th Grade school with Children’s Aid; a Community Based Organization, as our partners. Our school is located in the Washington Heights/ Inwood section of Manhattan in District 6. The school services approximately 650 students. The School’s mission is to prepare successful, literate, college-ready, life-long learners by providing Project Based, STEAM infused, rigorous instruction in a supportive and nurturing academic environment that is driven by high 2018-19 CEP 9  standards of learning to promote independent higher order global thinkers and successful problem solvers who can compete in the digital world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. To promote cross curricular integration of learning, and Internet accessibility to instructional materials by both students and staff, most of the school’s academic curriculum was purchased from the same publisher, The Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Company (HMH). Teachers, the building instructional coaches, and the Magnet Coordinator together on committees, and during grade level teacher team meetings, prioritize the curriculum taught, based on reflections from data analysis of student assessments. Literacy is taught using the Balanced Literacy Approach, the HMH program (Journeys/English & Senderos/Spanish), and Project Based Learning (PBL) units that were created by a PBL curriculum writing teacher team. All teachers in grades PK-2 have been or are in the process of being trained in Orton Gillingham programs. They use either the multisensory, language-based sequential approaches from the Reading Reform foundation or the Fundations Program. Across all grades PK-5 the workshop model of instruction is utilized across all content. To meet the needs of all students in mathematics, students in PK-5, at school and at home, use a standards based, self-paced internet program from the Mind Research Institute called ST (Spatial Temporal) Math sometimes known as JiJi Math. Additionally, to support and build basic reading skills, all students in grades K-2 as well as all self-contained classes and transitional bilingual classes up through grade 5 use a self-paced computer based reading program called iRead (also from HMH). Data gleaned from both these self-paced programs is also used to prioritize curriculum during grade level teacher team meetings. Enriching its already rigorous academic program, the school is in its second year of a federally funded “Magnet School Grant”. The Magnet theme is “Innovation in a global community”. Participating in this grant has enabled the school integrate STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, Math) into its teaching and learning across all grades. The school has is a full-time Visual Arts teacher. Also benefitting from a grant recieved from the Music in the Brain non-profit organization, the school has a full key-board lab and a full-time Music teacher that integrates literacy with the Performing Arts. Another grant that the school enjoys is from the college, New York Institute of Technology. Through this partnership the school now has a Hydroponic Lab, and in the 2018-2019 will be developing a Maker Space Lab. Other partnerships that the school maintains and benefits from are with:  Midori Music Foundaton – Interactive live workshops and performances transform the school Auditorium into handson musical experiences from across the globe.  Dancing Classrooms – All students in grade 5 students participate in a school based residency where they learn various ball room dances and from this residency a Ballroom Dancing team is selected each year to participate in competitions across the city.  Chess in the City – Students from grades 3-5 participate in chess lessons both during the school day and also after school. They also participate in competitions across the city. Because of the Fedral Magnet Grant, the school now offers after-school STEAM Clubs that include:  Art across the globe  Global delish Cooking Club  Coding   Drama through International stories  Hydroponics “Global uses of Basil” Lego Engineering 2018-19 CEP 10   Global Dance troupe Students who participate in the Children’s Aid after school program receive academic enrichment in literacy, STEAM, social emotional learning, nutrition and fitness. Another key component of the Children’s Aid program offerings is targeted academic intervention (TAI) in literacy focused on a cohort of grade 2 students. The student enrolled in the TAI receive pre, interim, and post assessments to gauge their progress as well as to focus on areas to ensure a comprehensive approach that supports the mastery of reading readiness skills and is aligned with the standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Being a Children’s Aid Community School, our special populations include students in the Children's Aid program, Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). All of the participants in Children’s Aid are assessed via the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment (DESSA-mini) in order to identify student strengths in eight Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) categories: self-awareness, self-management, social-awareness, relationship skills, goal-directed behavior, personal responsibility, decision making, and optimistic thinking. Based on these assessments, students are grouped according to whether they were displaying strong SEL skills, typical SEL skills, or were in need of additional SEL supports. Action plans are then created for students identified in need of additional SEL support that calls for convening of program directors, facilitators, and parents to discuss the possible proactive strategies for participants using the PRIM (Pre-Referral Intervention Manual). A strong sense of community is additionally fostered at the school through its strong partnership with Children’s Aid. Together the School’s Parent Association (PA) and Children's Aid offer, well attended, cycles of workshops such as Monday Math, Book of the Month, Health, English as a New language (ENL), Zumba, Yoga and Meditation, Nutrition, Mind In The Making, Chronic Absence and Parenting. The Parents Association (PA) is active and holds a minimum of 1 meeting a month. Other partnerships that the school enjoys include the New York Presbyterian (NYP) Morgan Stanley Babies Hospital which staffs an on-site School-Based Mental Health Clinic, through the partnership with NYP the school also is participating in restorative practices behavioral program called the CAM Program. Students and staff in PK through Grade 1 are participating in this program during the initial launch year. Other grades will be added in the following years. Teachers are Our special education population makes up 20% of our total population and they're comprised of ICT placement and Self Contained. We currently have one ICT in grades 1-5 and four self-contained classes servicing students from K-5. Each child has their designated IEP (Individual Education Plan) and adjustments to teaching and services are made to accommodate each individual child’s need. Our ELL's makes up approximately 28% of our total student population. To best support our ELLs, we have designed a TBP or Transitional Bilingual Program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a NYS School in “Good” Standing, on its last Quality Review, PS 152M earned five “well developed” and five “proficient” ratings on all 10 of the Quality Review components, and on the 2017 NYC Framework for Great Schools Report, it earned a “Good” rating in all 6 framework components and a "fair" rating for student achievement. It is therefore evident that PS 152 needs to focus on increasing student achievement, and also increasing family engagement to affect that positive growth . Focusing on increasing student achievement and being in alignment with the 2018-2019 Community District Six Goal: Students in grades 3-8 will show progress in Mathematics and Science as indicated in a 10% decrease of level 1 students in the 2019 state assessments, PS 152M- The Dyckman Valley school uses technology as part of their daily 2018-19 CEP 11  learning, and also offers enrichment activities for students. As part of the school’s transformation in becoming a Magnet School, re-writing and revising its curriculum to include Project Based Learning units that are STEAM integrated, and offering after-school STEAM integrated clubs the school is expecting to increase achievement and meet the district’s goal. Additionally as a path towards meeting this goal, all students participate in a computer-based program called Spatial Temporal Math (ST Math, also known as the "Ji-Ji" Program) from the Mind Research Institute. This unique program is accessed via the Internet, by the student both at school and at home. Students also utilize the “Think Central” website from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Company for extended learning activities in Literacy and Math. Also in alignment with another District Six Goal: To have an increase of parental engagement in participation and the decision-making process as measured by a 5% increase in parental response in the NYC School Survey, the school consistently works on solidifying home-school partnerships, by creating opportunities for families to access academic programs from home, through programs such as ST Math, iRead, Class dojo, and Think Central from HMH. These links strengthen the connections by ensuring that its families are supported on how best to help their children. Students in Pre-kindergarten utilize a computer based academic home-school link through the HMH – “Big Day” Curriculum. Students in grades K through 2 participate in the" i-Read Program", another computer-based program that focuses specifically on strengthening the five(5) pillars of Reading skills, Phonemic Awareness, Phonics, Fluency, Vocabulary, and Comprehension. Through the use of these programs students build on their basic skills in Literacy and Math while enhancing their logic and thinking abilities by participating in grade appropriate Common Core aligned activities on both Apple and PC platforms, thus preparing them for the digital world. To ensure uniformity and rigor of instruction, building Administrators observe teaching and learning frequently, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and a school based instrument that focuses on looking for what the school has identified as the four essential elements of good instruction: 1. Higher Order Thinking (HOT) engagement & questioning 2. Explicit Instruction through modeling 3. Giving actionable feedback to students 4. Differentiation of instruction Administrator classroom visits also always looks for evidence of the school’s instructional focus, which is, language development through meaningful connections between reading and writing during teaching and learning. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M152 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 572 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.0% % Reduced Lunch 28.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 96.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 2% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 64% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 75 73 92.7% 1.6% 22.0% 1.9% 0.2% 0.3% 6 9% 9.5 30.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Goal #1 - Needs: Rigorous Math Instruction: Based on an analysis of the NYS Mathematics 2017 and 2018 June Instructional Report Summaries, an average growth of 10 proficiency points, from 2.44 in 2017 to 2.54 in 2018 was indicated. Although there was growth, the school still strives to bridge the gap in having its students meet the standard. In alignment with the District 6 goal of showing progress in Mathematics, and understanding that approximately 66% of its tested students still scored below the standard, the school believes that while growth was indicated on the latest NYS Math exam, the school still needs to focus on the academic rigor of Math and STEM activities, units and lesson plans to include data-driven protocols that are aligned to the content standards to meet the individual needs of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #1/ Rigorous Mathematics Instruction: By June 2019, 100% of Teacher Teams across grades K-5 will implement a minimum two (2) coherent rigorous Project Based Learning (PBL) units of study that are aligned to the school’s Magnet theme of “Innovation in a Global Community”. Included will be engaging Math and STEAM tasks, with multiple entry points for all learners. This goal will be measured by the number of PBL units our Math and STEAM activities have met by the end of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers by grade, building suppoprt staff, grade specific Instructional Leaders, Administrators, Consultants from: -HMH  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To meet the needs of all learners, the taught curriculum is prioritized based on data findings, then units and lesson plans are adjusted in grade level Teacher Teams with the Building Instructional Coaches and Administration. Grade-level Teacher Teams meet at minimum once a month to unpack and differentiate the school's research based math instructional programs, and the inclusion of Math/Steam activities in the magnet themed PBL units . To ensure uniformity and consistency of teaching and learning of units and lessons, both vertically and horizontally, across all grades, instructional staff participates in professional development facilitated by consultants from: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH), Engineering is Elementary (EIE), and school level instructional support staff, During these sessions, staff utilize but is not limited to using the following books and/or instructional materials from EIE: -Strategies for Success with English Language Learners (ELLs) by Virginia Pauline Rojas (Fall ’18 - Spring ‘19) - Go-Math Houghton - Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) Program guides and writing component. - Assessment Bundle by Susan Brookhardt (Fall ’18) - Teaching students to Self-Assess by (ASCD Arias) (Spring ’19) Teachers of General Education, ELL and SWDs in grades K-5 PBL Units by Grade: Kindergarten  #1 (Oct 1 - Nov 12)  #2 (Jan 11-March 8) Grade 1  #1 (Oct 1 - Nov 21)  #2 (March 4 - May 3) Grade 2  #1 (Oct 1 - Nov 16)  #2 (March 18 - May 17) 2018-19 CEP 15  Grade 3  #1 (Sept 24-Nov 16)  #2 (Jan 2 - March 1)  #3 (April 1 - June 14) Grade 4  #1 (Sept 21 - Nov 24)  #2 (Feb 11 - April 18) Grade 5  #1 (Jan 3 - March 13)  #2 (April 18 - June 19) Strategies used to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups include, but are not be limited to: All instructional staff Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Instructional leaders, Classroom teachers,  Strategies from the book written by Virginia Pauline Rojas, Strategies for Success with English Language Learners ENL Providers, Building Support Staff, Administration 2018-19 CEP 16  Implemention of strategies learned during district-wide Metamorhosis professional learning series on Math instruction  Emotionally Responsive Practices - BankStreet College of Education (Fall '18) Small group instruction (Fall‘18) Step-up to Writing Strategies (Fall'18-Spring'19)   Math and STEAM centers (Fall'18-Spring'19)   Orton Gillingham /Foundations Training (Fall '18 )  Testing modifications (Winter ‘19)   DOK questioning strategies (Fall '18-Spring'19)  Visual supports for differentiated instruction (Fall '18)  Hands-on activities (Spring ‘19)  Use of technology specifically "Think Central" games Language scaffolding (Fall ‘18) and ST Math "JiJi""  Resources in English and Spanish from HMH (Fall'18- Spring'19) Saturday Academy for ELLs (from January through March ‘19) To expose parents and guardians to the Math curriculum, increase their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the standards, and to engage them in academically supporting their children at home, workshops including, but not limited to, the following, are offered: Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018 through June 2019  Accessing and maneuvering through the ST Math program (Nov 2018)  Math Key Focus Standards expectations (Dec 2018)  Vocabulary development strategies (Jan 2019)  Integration of STEM Education across the curriculum, with a focus on Math and STEAM as they are presented in the school's PBL units of study  Use of technology as an academic link between the school and home (Feb 2019)  Testing (March 2019) At minimum, these parent engagement meetings/workshops are arranged by the parent coordinator and the Parent Association President, and conducted in grade clusters (PK-K), (1&2), (3,4,&5) monthly by the Building Instructional Coaches and Administration. Parent Coordinator, Instructional leaders, Building Coach, Administration, CBO Partners Through weekly Professional Development, Parent Workshops, and Conversations parents and teachers will address the needs of the students ensuring student growth and success. Families and Instructional Staff Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Instructional leaders, Building Coach, Administration, CBO Partners 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents and guardians to support their understanding of the Math curriculum, increase their comprehension of Rigorous Instruction and the standards, and to academically support their children at home, in workshops including, but not limited to, the following:  Accessing and maneuvering through the ST Math program (Nov 2018)  Math Key Focus Standards expectations (Dec 2018)  Vocabulary development strategies (Jan 2019)  Integration of STEM Education across the curriculum, with a focus on Math and STEAM as they are presented in the school's PBL units of study  Use of technology as an academic link between the school and home (Feb 2019)  Testing (March 2019) At minimum, these parent engagement meetings/workshops are arranged by the parent coordinator and the Parent Association President and conducted in grade clusters (PK-K), (1&2), (3,4,&5) monthly by the building coach, and Administration. To further support our families, Children’s Aid, our partner Community Based Organization engages families in workshops focused on the research and impact of: - Chronic absenteeism - Pasos - creating a college going environment in the home - Mind In The Making - focuses on the executive functioning skills that children need to succeed in school and in life. Children’s Aid also offers classes in ESL, GED in English and Spanish, as well as social emotional learning classes focused on mindset, emotional intelligence and personality at the Salome Ureña Campus that is within walking distance to our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to implement this action plan for goal #1, include, but are not limited to:  Standards aligned Math Programs/Curriculum; Go-Math (HMH), ST Math JiJi Math, PBL Units of study, and the HMH Big Day curriculum  Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), and fedral Magnet Grant funds will be used to pay for: o Technological Programs; ST Math Program, HMH Think Central o Instructional Support Staff and Consultant supports 2018-19 CEP 18  Schedule adjustments for Grade Leaders to: - attend PD - develop and plan presentations to turnkey information gained at the PDs - meet with instructional coach - inter-visitations - learning walks - materials needed for each activity Identification and commitment of Grade Level Leaders, in grade clusters of (PK-K), (1&2), (3,4,&5).   Danielson Framework For Teaching  NYS Learning Standards  Depth of Knowledge/Hess Cognitive Rigor Rubric  Extending the meeting time of Teacher Team Meetings during Professional Development and Other Professional Work Time (Mondays and Tuesdays)  PD Sessions with teachers during a common prep period each week;  Teacher Team Meeting Protocols  Assistant Principals to ensure consistency of practice Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Goal #1/Rigorous Instruction: By March 1, 2019, our mid-point progress goal will be measured by the number of newly developed PBL units of study implemented by Grades K-5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Goal #1- Teacher Teams across all grades will review each unit published, ensuring that student assessment data was used to revise and adjust each coherent rigorous PBL unit of study to include cognitively engaging Math and STEAM tasks, multiple entry points, scaffolds, research based instructional strategies, and summative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Goal #2 – Supportive Environment - Needs: As confirmed by the most recent School Quality Report the school’s results indicated that 84% of the survey participants responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment. This result is 1% point higher than the New York City’s average score. Looking deeper into this category and its selected survey questions, the results showed a dip indicating that 79% of teachers who took the survey, say that adults at this school teach students how to advocate for themselves. The City scored 86% on the same question. The school therefore believes that it needs to positively impact its students’ social emotional development, enhance the already established classroom and school culture so that students learn to better advocate for themselves in an environment where they feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #2/Supportive Environment: By June 2019, 100% of students in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 will participate in a minimum of 6 activities and/ or school-wide assemblies/events focusing on social emotional development, highlighting the concepts of self-awareness, self-advocacy, positive behavior & academic achievement. This goal will be measured by number of incidents entered into OORS. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  During Teacher Team meetings, teachers will read and discuss an Education Week published article titled: Students Help Design Measures of Social-Emotional Skills (Nov 2018) Teachers will receive professional development and/or materials on the importance of: Understanding and addressing social emotional learning Ready Set Respect! Glen's Elementary School Kit (September'18-June'19) We're going back to school: Rituals and Routines (September 2018) The NYC Behavioral Code of conduct (September 2018) The NED SHOW understanding the “growth” Mindset (September 2018) Bullying Identification and prevention (October 2018) Character Development- Empowering concepts for students (October 2018) Age appropriate behavior management (Dec 2018) PRIM -The Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (Jan 2019) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers by grade, building Instructional support, Instructional Leaders, Guidance, Administrators, CBO Partners General Education, ELL and SWDs in grades PK-5 September 2018 through June 2019 1. The NED SHOW understanding the “growth” Mindset (September 2018) 2. Character Development- Empowering concepts for students “Yes I Can” (October 2018) 3. The Great Kindness Campaign (January 2019) 4. The Great Reading Challenge ( March 2019) 5. Assembly -Are you a Chameleon? (April 2019) 2018-19 CEP 21  Students will participate in six (6) whole school by Grade Cluster All students in grades K-5 October 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers 6. Assembly -Kids for Peace (May 2019) Guidance Counselor CBO Partners Administration Assemblies and/or competitions to include, but not limited to,: 1. The NED SHOW understanding the “growth” Mindset (September 2018) 2. Character Development- Empowering concepts for students “Yes I Can” (October 2018) 3. The Great Kindness Campaign (January 2019) 4. The Great Reading Challenge ( March 2019) 5. Assembly -Are you a Chameleon? (April 2019) 6. Assembly -Kids for Peace (May 2019) Additional programs offered are:  o How to apologize (Nov 2018) o Conquering fear & Testing (December 2018) o Dealing with embarrassment & Maintaining Friendships (February 2019) o Anger Management (March 2019) o Body Image (April 2019) Families during Parent Association (PA) Meetings as well as in workshops with the guidance Counselor and Administration, will be exposed to the social emotional topics that their children will be exploring during monthly assemblies. Parents and guardians of students in grades K-5 To assist families with the content presented to students during the school assemblies, these meetings will be held at least one (1) week before each student assembly. October 2018 through June 2019 mirroring time frames presented above to students Guidance Counselor Parents Association Parent Coordinator CBO Partners Administration School Safety Team Monthly Meeting will include an analysis of occurrences as documented in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and determine possible causes or common factors in recurring incidents in order to develop systems or structures to reduce specific behavioral incidents. Students, Teachers, School Aides, Parents Monthly Beginning November through June 2019 School Safety Team Guidance Counselor Parents Association Teachers and school aides will be engaged in professional development activities to identify resources that can be used to Parent Coordinator Teachers and school aides will Monthly Beginning CBO Partners 2018-19 CEP 22  improve student behavior in the entire school, but, in particular, in the classrooms and the cafeteria. participate in PD once per month. November through June 2019 Administration Building Administrators Guidance Counselor CBO Partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Association (PA) will engage families in monthly meetings; additional workshops with the guidance Counselor, school social worker and Administration, will expose families to the social emotional topics that their children will be exploring during monthly assemblies. To assist families with the content presented to students during the school assemblies, these meetings will be held at least one (1) week before each student assembly. Additionally, Children’s Aid will offer workshops focused on: Social emotional learning - Child abuse awareness, bullying and domestic violence Children’s Aid also offers social emotional learning classes focused on mindset, emotional intelligence and personality at the Salome Ureña Campus that is within walking distance to our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to implement this action plan for goal #2, include, but are not limited to: 2018-19 CEP 23  Identification and commitment of Grade Level Leaders, in grade clusters of (PK-K), (1&2), (3,4,&5) to lead and plan developmentally appropriate assemblies and events to meet social emotional needs for each grade cluster  Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for: o Schedule adjustments for Grade Leaders and support staff to attend PD   develop and plan instruction  develop and implement assemblies and/or events o contract consultants and/or presenters o Instructional Coach to ensure that activities and/or events are aligned to the CCS and are extended into the classrooms o materials needed for each activity or event  Guidance Counselor  Behavioral Intervention Protocols  Administration to ensure consistency of practice  Services from Community-Based Organizations, to include parent/family outreach and mental health services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Goal #2 - Supportive Environment: By Feb 2019, a minimum, of three (3) student assemblies will be held to strengthen and develop student Social/Emotional skills, cultivating a school-wide culture where students want to come to school because they feel safer and more self-assured. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Goal #2 - Growth in this goal will be measured by completion of a minimum of three (3) student assemblies, positive gains of 3% on the second of three parent surveys conducted throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Goal # 3- Collaborative Teachers - Needs: PS 152 students have demonstrated growth in last year’s NYS exams, yet on average, its students have not yet met or exceeded the standards in either ELA or Math (2018 Math average 2.54 and 2018 ELA average 2.49) Understanding that students’ success begins in the school belief system, and that the PS152M Belief System has identified; 1. Higher Order Thinking (HOT) engagement & questioning, 2. Explicit Instruction through modeling, 3. Giving actionable feedback to students, 4. Differentiation of instruction, as the four essential elements of good instruction, the school has identified the need for teachers to collaboratively analyze data to driven coherent instruction that offers multiple entry points of access for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #3 / Collaborative Teachers: By June 2019, 100% of classroom teachers in grade level Teacher Teams will utilize both whole grade and individual class data to develop lessons containing differentiated instruction. This instruction will be delivered to students with disabilities through the coordination of paraprofessional support by the classroom teacher addressing individual educational plans of the students. Our bi-lingual bridge classes will have a second teacher pushing in to collaborate with the classroom teacher during literacy, math and science periods to supply differentiated instruction. This goal will be measured by student data from the New York City performance tasks at the end of the year. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To ensure uniform content and CCS aligned instruction for all students, the HMH English - Journeys and HMH Spanish - Senderos Literacy Programs is used across all grades Kindergarten through Grade 5. All students in grades Kindergarten through Grade 5 September 2018 through June 2019 Classroom teachers, Out of class Instructional Staff Further ensuring that all students are provided with multiple points of entry, students are assessed approximately every six weeks by taking culminating unit tests for each of the six units the HMH program (Oct-June). Students in grades 2 through 5 take the grade appropriate NYC Literacy Task Assessments to launch the instructional path for the year, and all in grades K-5 are administered the DRA2 at the Beginning (BOY), Middle (MOY), and End of year (EOY). Results from all of these assessments are used by teachers to monitor student learning, prioritize curriculum taught, and revise units of study. Using the data from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) unit tests and the BOY-Beginning of Year, MOY-Middle of Year, and EOY-End of Year assessments taken by all students, all teachers, in grade Teacher Teams (TT) and individually, engage in professional development to: Teachers and other instructional staff BOY October 2018, MOY February 2019, Building Administrators, Building Instructional Coach,  Analyze data generated by the results of the above mentioned assessments  Plan lessons using the HMH resources to meet the learning needs linked to the CCS with focus to the school's Key Focus Standards, the school's Instructional Focus of Language Development, as well as the more May 2019. Unit tests every six weeks starting October Grade Leaders, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26  closely identified standards from the data analysis done in TTs Grade Level Teacher Teams, including out of class teachers and service providers, meet at least every six weeks to discuss and reflect on the data analysis, identify and target Common Core Learning Standards (CCS) needing to be addressed for both whole class and individual instruction Instructional staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018 through June 2019 Included in these assessments Every six weeks starting October 2018 through June 2019 Instructional staff, Administration, Instructional Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Administration together with school social worker, guidance and Parent Association will engage families in workshops and monthly meetings to share the collaborative teaching strategies with the goal of promoting teacher-parent teams focused on better supporting their children’s academic progress at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to implement this action plan for goal #3, include, but are not limited to:  Common Core aligned Literacy Program/Curriculum; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) - Journeys & Senderos Literacy Programs  Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for: o Technological Programs; Waterford Program, Think Central o o Schedule adjustments for Grade Leaders to Instructional Coaches and Consultant supports attend PD   develop and plan presentations to turnkey information gained at the PDs  meet with instructional coach   inter-visitations learning walks o materials needed for each activity  Identification and commitment of Grade Level Leaders, in grade clusters of (PK-K), (1&2), (3,4,&5). 2018-19 CEP 27   Danielson Framework For Teaching  Common Core Learning Standards  Depth of Knowledge/Hess Cognitive Rigor Rubric  Teacher Team Meetings during Professional Development and Other Professional Work Time (Mondays and Tuesdays), a common prep period each week; PD Sessions/ workshops with teachers during Professional Development days  Teacher Team Meeting Protocols  Assistant Principals to ensure consistency of practice Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Goal #3-Collaborative Teachers: By March 2019, 70% classroom teachers will plan and teach to include data based differentiation of instruction, facilitating multiple points of access for all students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Goal#3 In monthly School Supervisory/ Cabinet Meetings, on-going monitoring of teacher observation data and ADVANCE reports documenting teachers’ implementation of standards based strategies to support subgroup populations, embedded in the learning Standards-aligned curricula leading to improved teacher effectiveness in Domain 1: Planning & Preparation and Domain 3: Instruction By June 2019, building supervisors will have observed and documented observations that evidence that 100% of classroom teachers plan and teach using the results of: Item analysis of DRA 2 BOY, MOY, & EOY Assessments- grades K -2   HMH Reading Inventory with Lexile scores - grades 3 -5  HMH units and Go Math chapter tests taken from October 2018 through May 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Goal #4 - Effective School Leadership Needs: To ensures a system of accountability for every student’s academic and social success, when comparing the 2018 -Grade 3 ELA proficiency levels which was an average score of 2.27, to the 2018-Grade 4 ELA average score of 2.45, the school enjoyed an overall .18 level of growth. Understanding the need to prioritize curriculum to improve critical individual and school-wide practices to further increase growth towards meeting the state proficiency level, in the 2018-2019 academic year, “Key Focus Standards” were identified by the leadership cabinet using the 2018 Instructional Report, focusing in on ELA results. These Key Focus Standards were determined by analyzing the Percentage Point Changes from 2017 to 2018 student scores for each of the CCS assessed. Specifically these standards and their mastery averages percentiles are:  RI.4.7 – scoring at -26% points (Reading Informational Text: Interpret information presented visually, orally, or quantitatively (e.g., in charts, graphs, diagrams, time lines, animations, or interactive elements on Web pages) and explain how the information contributes to an understanding of the text in which it appears.)  RL.4.2 – scoring at -31% points (Reading Literature: Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text; summarize the text.) The priority need is therefore to ensure that school-wide “Key Focus Standards” and Language Development are addressed through prioritized data driven instruction that includes Higher Order Thinking (HOT) questioning and engagement to facilitate students in meeting the standards of RI.4.7 and RL.4.2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #4 / Effective School Leadership: By May 2019, 100% of School Leaders will give at minimum one actionable feedback comment, addressing the Danielson Rubric component 3B “Using questioning and discussion techniques on all observations entered into the Advance Rating System as measured by a minimum increase of the school average score for component 3B by fifteenths average points (from 2.85 to 3.00) in the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) in the Advance rating system. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development Mondays to include:  Cycles of grade planning in which teachers work together to prioritize and shape the delivery of the curriculum by sharing best teaching practices and ensuring that their planning and practice address the Key Focus Standards and the Instructional Focus of Language Development.  Reflections from both horizontal and vertical Inter-visitations between teachers to ensure uniformity of practice, sharing of best practices, curriculum selection and delivery.  Differentiated support to address professional needs of teachers and paraprofessionals to support and strengthen teaching practices to address the diverse learning needs of ELLs and SWDs, as well as high performing students. All teachers, all paraprofessionals, all supervisors Beginning in September 2018 and continuing on a weekly basis through May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coach, Consultants, Mentors, Grade Leader Teachers, Teachers Pre and post observation conferences between supervisors and teachers to include actionable feedback to teachers that focus on pedagogical practices addressing the Key Focus Standards and Language Development, using Charlotte Danielson’s Framework For Teaching Domain 3, leading to the improvement of student learning outcomes for all sub group student populations. All teachers, all supervisors Teachers to share curriculum and instructional expectations with families, as well as provide individual student progress and performance information to families . All teachers, all families Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals Beginning in September 2018 and continuing on a weekly basis through May 2019 Beginning in September 2018 and continuing on a weekly basis through May 2019 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal along with the Assistant Principals and the building Instructional Coaches together will engage families in four workshops throughout the school year to share the school's curriculum and ways that parents/families can support their children at home towards academic progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to implement this action plan, include, but are not limited to:  Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for: o purchasing additional HMH materials o o the Licensing fee for the Waterford Program support teachers and paraprofessionals’ professional development with consultants from  HMH  Reading Reform  Waterford program o Schedule adjustments for Grade Leaders and support staff to attend PD   develop & plan instruction  implement assemblies and/or events o Building Instructional Coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Goal #4 - By March 2019, linking classroom observations and administrative feedback, 100% of School Leaders will give at minimum one actionable feedback,focusing on Danielson Rubric component 3B; “Using questioning and discussion techniques” on all observations. Growth for this goal will be measured by a 0.10 increase of average points (from 2.85 to 2.95) in the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Goal #4 - Growth in goal #4 will be measured through, on-going review and monitoring of teacher observations during bi-weekly cabinet meetings. These meetings will ensure that actionable feedback comments, focusing on Danielson's component 3B, are included in all observation reports. The meeting will also monitor average scores, checking for positive growth in component 3B, for all teachers' observations entered into the Advance System. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Goal #5 - Needs: The school adheres to the belief that strong Family-Community Ties are necessary for students' success. It also feels that good two-way communication is essential to strengthen these ties. Analyzing the results from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report summary, specifically the Strong Family-Community Ties category/ Parent Outreach Category , the school earned an average score of 95%. This score is two (2) average percentage points higher than the city's score and it's own 2017 score. This score indicates that PS 152M is engaging its families/community at a higher rate than other city schools, but strives to get even better. Therefore, upon reflection received from various school constituencies, the school has identified that it needs to enhance its Family-Community Ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #5 - Strong Family and Community Ties: By June 2019, Strong Family-Community Ties will be increased by 3% as indicated on the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey Report Summary score as measured by increased Family-Community participation in workshops and/or events facilitated throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching staff will participate in and/or facilitate workshops or events, aimed at increasing Family-Community Ties. Workshop topics may include, but are limited to: Parents, Families, Guardians  technology training to build parents’ capacity to: o access school data and school communications via the Internet o help their children at home with school's Internet based academic programs  understanding student data    grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations literacy accessing community and support services September 2018 through June 2019 Principal Teachers Parent Coordinator PA CBOs The Principal will meet with the Parent Association (PA) Executive Board monthly Parents, Association September 2018 Principal Simultaneous translations will be available for Non-English speaking parents during all events/meetings, this will include language other than English and Spanish Parents, Families, Guardians through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 PA Executive Board Parent Coordinator Staff Members speaking languages other than English or Spanish 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children’s Aid, our partner Community Based Organization engages families in workshops focused on the research and impact of: - Chronic absence 2018-19 CEP 33  - Pasos - creating a college going environment in the home - Mind In The Making - focuses on the executive functioning skills that children need to succeed in school and in life. Children’s Aid also offers classes in ESL, GED in English and Spanish, as well as social emotional learning classes focused on mindset, emotional intelligence and personality at the Salome Ureña Campus that is within walking distance to our school. Additionally, Children's Aid organizes family events throughout the year focused on community building, shared learning and holiday celebrations such as the Thanksgiving Family Dinner, Children's EXPO that occurs twice per year, and college presentations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to implement the action plan for goal #5, include, but are not limited to: Conceptual Consolidation - Funds, such as Title 1, and Fair Student Funding (FSF), will be used to pay for:  Allowable funds to cover the costs associated with Parent Engagement activities  Per Session for in-house translators  Supplies for workshops and family events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Goal #5 - Strong Family and Community Ties: By February of 2019, Strong Family and Community Ties will increase by 2% as indicated by family participation attendance logs of in school activities and/or workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Throughout the 2018-2019 academic school year progress in this goal will be measured by family/community participation as evidenced by attendance logs. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest 1/3 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) I- Read ELA in grades K-2 Grades 3,4, &5 Reading Intervention Saturday Academy Grades K-5 ST Math Intervention Saturday Academy Mathematics Lowest 1/3 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Technology based intervention at individual students’ levels Small groups with Licensed Reading Teacher When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day minimum of 45 minutes a week 3 days a week during the school day Small group instruction focusing on English Language Development Technology based intervention at individual students’ levels utilizing both iPads and PCs Small group instruction focusing on English Language Development through the content of Math Saturdays from October 2018through May ‘19 90 minutes a week during the school day Saturdays from October '18through May ‘19 2018-19 CEP 36 Classroom Observations and common Assessments Classroom Observations and common Assessments NYS ELA Assessments Science curriculum vocabulary and concepts is incorporated into the literacy block Social Studies curriculum incorporated into literacy block through the writing units that are aligned with the common core standards Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Science cluster teachers using Tier I strategies and hands-on experiments Tier I -Small group differentiated instruction in classroom During the school day Tier I -Small group differentiated instruction in classroom During the school day 1:1 Crisis Intervention During the school day Short cycles of Small Group sessions as needed to address social - emotional at school Home visits or outreach to families and referrals to CBOs for targeted assistance Assemblies to address the whole child through social-emotional supports and self help strategies During the school day Monthly assemblies during the school day September 2018through June 2019 Teacher referral Parent request Guidance Attendance Records (ATS) OORS reports Common Assessments Student Portfolios City Connects Student Assessments (K-2nd) Attendance Committee intervention Administration in partnership with school staff and/or contracted vendors 2018-19 CEP 37  Small group and 1:1 sessions with licensed psychologist, Social Worker, or Social Worker interns supervised by on-siteLicensed Social Worker (CBOs) Evenings and after school by appointment and as needed during crisis Partnerships with: - NY Presbyterian School Based Mental Health Clinic - Children's Aid - City Connects collaboration between Children's Aid andBoston University 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As per the end of October 2018, we have 239 Doubled Up students, 7 shelter students, 4 students in temporary living situations for a total of 250 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. To support these students, we provide academic intervention services in the form of push-in and pull-out models. We also provide a Saturday Academy to further strengthen these students academically. We also provide support for the students in the form of supplies and materials as needed, school uniforms, eye glasses and metro cards. Trips and student activities are also funded for these students. For the parents, we provide computer literacy classes and other educational workshops to give them extra support with their child. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 CEP 39 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  All teachers are assigned within their license area  New teachers work collaboratively with their grade teams to develop, refine and revise CCS aligned curriculum that supports college and career readiness. Additionally, new teachers receive mentoring above and beyond the required hours. This is accomplished through in class coaching support, regularly scheduled mentoring sessions, and professional development support provided by Building Coach and Consultants. The school mentor completed the DOE mentoring program  The Principal, Assistant Principals and teachers collaborate to calibrate common language and understanding around use of the Danielson Framework For Teaching that is used to inform pre- and post-observation conferences and rate teaching practices uniformly in the Advance System.  Teachers not yet tenured receive support from the instructional coach, the administrative cabinet, as well as consultants, in gathering artifacts and evidence for their portfolios to document their effective instructional practices during their probationary employment period.  Teachers working with a Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP) receive additional support to improve teaching practices. In-house on-going professional development Includes cycles of Teacher Team Meetings focusing on:  o Data Analysis o Common Planning o Sharing Best Practices o Curriculum Prioritization o Reflection Since the majority of staff is senior and tenured, the need for recruitment is minimal.   Retention at PS 152 is extremely high as evidenced by the fact that there are only 4 classroom teachers on probation in contrast to 38 appointed teachers with an average of 20 years of seniority.  When the need to hire arises, outreach is made to the borough Director of Human Resources, the Superintendent's office, other Principals, and the on-line NYC Teacher Finder tool to find highly qualified and highly recommended candidates to interview. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 41   High quality professional development for teachers, paraprofessionals, assistant principals, the principal, and staff that enables all students to meet Common Core Standards (CCS) is provided in-house by invited consultants, CBO partners, Grade lead-teachers, the building Instructional Coach, or through DOE support from either the Manhattan Borough Support Center or the Superintendent's office. Other professional development is provided by sending representatives from each of the various constituencies across the building to workshops outside of the building  Teacher growth is supported through Principal and Assistant Principals feedback that is specific, low inference, evidence-based, and part of their formative observations  One-to-one meetings with cabinet members that include the building Instructional Coach provide the support  that can improve teaching practice are arranged on an "as needed" basis Inter-visitation between teachers to share and reflect on best practices are encouraged and supported by schedule changes to support the visits  New teachers who have not yet obtained tenure, and teachers with "TIP" plans receive the maximum support. Experienced teachers have leadership opportunities to help support the professional learning throughout the school Staff Development is monitored and revised, based on the results of student data and teacher effectiveness needs   Teachers have Professional Development opportunities to assist them in developing specific strategies to support the learning needs of ELLs and SWDs in reading comprehension, academic vocabulary, and written analysis of texts, both literary and non-fiction Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 152M has both Department of Education (DOE) and Community Based Organization (CBO) Pre-K classes in the building. The school coordinates efforts with our on-site Community Based Organization, Children’s Aid to ensure a smooth transition from Pre-k to our Kindergarten program 2018-19 CEP 42  PS 152M also includes Pre-K students in school-wide assemblies and events. Students in the DOE program, are taught using the “Big Day” Program from the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) company to prepare them for the content and format of the HMH curriculum that is used in grades Kindergarten through five (5). Additionally, to prepare them to build both their Mathematical and computer skills, they participate in the newly developed Pre-K – “(Spatial Temporal) ST -Math” Program developed by The Mind Research Institute that was piloted during school year 2018-2019. Students in the Children’s Aid Pre-K program are taught using the Tools of the Mind curriculum, which focuses on the development of both cognitive and social-emotional self-regulation at the same time that academic skills are taught. Research-based literacy and math activities are modified to include self-regulatory components, and special instructional activities are designed to teach self-regulation and reflective thinking. In late spring, the Pre-K community is invited to visit the Kindergarten classes and meet the Kindergarten teachers to receive information on the different programs offered at the school. Records of the Pre-k students zoned to attend the school are collected in June and reviewed to ensure appropriate class placements for their Kindergarten year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In grade specific Teacher Teams, teachers are given opportunities throughout the prior school year to review and adjust the next year’s school assessments and overall pacing calendars/assessment plan. To meet students’ needs, revisions to these documents are made on an on-going basis based on student data throughout each year. Teachers are provided with Professional Development opportunities during their extended work days on Mondays and Tuesdays, as well as during school days that are specifically scheduled for outside consultants to meet with targeted staff. During the 2018-2019 school year, consultants from HMH, the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD), and the Center for Education Innovation (CEI) have been contracted to provide Professional Development to improve instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 43 consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5-5a-Goal 1, Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $379,241.00 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal $157,025.00 $23,630.00 X X X Title III, Immigrant Federal N/A N/A Tax Levy (FSF) Local $3,613,096.00 X Section 5-5b-Goal 2, Section 5-5c-Goal 3, Section 5-5d-Goal 4, Section 5-5e-Goal 5, Section 7 part a, Section 8 Section 5-5a-Goal 1 Section 5-5a-Goal 1, Section 6, Section 7 part a N/A Section 5-5a-Goal 1, Section 5-5b-Goal 2, Section 5-5c-Goal 3, Section5-5d-Goal 4, Section5-5e-Goal 5 2018-19 CEP 44  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 CEP 45  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy School-Parent Involvement Policy Parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for planning and implementing effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. I. School Responsibilities Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: -Using academic learning time efficiently -Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences -Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Standards -Offering high quality instruction in all content areas -Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: - Conducting parent-teacher conferences discussing individual student progress across all content - Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved 2018-19 CEP 47  - Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting - Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education - Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand - Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact - Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information - Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: - Ensuring that staff has access to interpretation services facilitating effective communication with non-English speaking parents - Notifying parents of procedures for arranging appointments with their children’s teacher/s or other school staff member - Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent Workshops Provide general support to parents by: - Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians - Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their children’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) - Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community - Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents - Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: - Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent 2018-19 CEP 48  - Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age - Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary - Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) -Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games - Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time - Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child - Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education - Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district - Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested - Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact - Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible - Take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams - Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities: - Attend school regularly and arrive on time - Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time - Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions - Show respect for myself, other people and property - Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully - Always try my best to learn Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students To ensure an effective school-wide partnership with parents/families enabling them to support their children in building durable skills for learning. The school in partnership with Children’s Aid and the Parent’s Association holds workshops where parents learn and fine-tune strategies to initiate and enhance conversations in their homes that are grounded in school learning and academic vocabulary across the contents of ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. 2018-19 CEP 49  Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase parent/family involvement and have the best chance to help students meet state standards. Parents are invited to participate in workshops focusing on building academic vocabulary through conversations in their homes. They are also invited, to school assemblies and academic celebrations at the culmination of the various units of study that their children are taught throughout the academic year. SLT Meetings PA Meetings Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Workshop series for parents to gain skills in both helping their students academically and social emotionally. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template Parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for planning and implementing effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: -Using academic learning time efficiently -Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences -Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Standards -Offering high quality instruction in all content areas -Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships - Conducting parent-teacher conferences discussing individual student progress across all content - Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved - Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting 2018-19 CEP 50  - Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education - Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand - Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact - Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information - Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff - Ensuring that staff has access to interpretation services facilitating effective communication with non-English speaking parents - Notifying parents of procedures for arranging appointments with their children’s teacher/s or other school staff member - Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent Workshops Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents - Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians - Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their children’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) - Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community - Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents - Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 51  - Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent - Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age - Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary - Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) -Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games - Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time - Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child - Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education - Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district - Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested - Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact - Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible - Take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams - Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: - Attend school regularly and arrive on time - Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time - Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions - Show respect for myself, other people and property - Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully - Always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated in the academic instruction at PS 152 in the following ways:   the Community School Director participates in the SLT, Safety Committee, BRT, PD sessions, and PPT meetings the Community School Director supports the assessment of students in grades K through 2nd via the implementation of the City Connects initiative that identify needs and services for each student using a tier system from Tier 1 (Low), 2a (mild), 2b (moderate), and 3 (intensive).  Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in literacy is provided to a cohort of 20 – 25 second graders in the after school program who are functioning below grade level.  All students in the Children’s Aid after school are assessed using the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment – mini (DESSA-mini) to predict early warning signs of problem behaviors at the individual student level and create intervention plans that supports students’ social-emotional wellness and academic focus. Youth assessed with the DESSA-mini receive a single raw score that places them in one of three categories: Strength, Typical and Need for Instruction. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The goals of the CS for the 2018-2019 school year are:  The CSD will participate in 95% of the school’s leadership committees, such as the SLT, Safety, PPT and BRT.  The Resource Coordinator in collaboration with teachers and guidance will assess all students in grades K through 2nd via the City Connects partnership with Children’s Aid and Boston College. Students identified in the Need for Instruction tier will receive intervention plans mid-year and reassessed at the end of the year to gauge progress and/or continued need for services. Students receiving Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in the Children’s Aid after school program will sustain or improve their literacy skills by 2 levels in the Diagnostic Reading Assessment 2 (DRA2).   All students in the Children’s Aid after school program who are identified in the DESSA-mini Needs category will receive action plans with strategies obtained from the PRIM. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Expanded Learning Time – Children’s Aid TAI supports 20 – 25 students in second grade by providing additional instruction in literacy two times per week for 45 minutes. Each student is assessed using the CARS a minimum of twice per year. The curriculum for all students in the Children’s Aid after school this year will be Journeys to align with the school day curriculum. Children also receive STEM enrichment activities as well as social-emotional learning instruction based on the School Age Division core values of work hard, focus, create community, show love/be compassionate, and have fun/feel joy. 2018-19 CEP 54  Attendance Supports – Partners will work together to review students’ absence weekly, outreach to parents will also occur simultaneously and success mentors will be employed to support student attendance every day. Family Engagement – The Children’s Aid, our partner Community Based Organization engages families in workshops focused on the research and impact of chronic absence, college readiness, and on raising awareness of the executive functioning skills that children need to succeed in school and in life. Additionally, Children’s Aid also offers classes in ESL, GED in English and Spanish, as well as social emotional learning classes focused on mindset, emotional intelligence and personality at the Salome Ureña and Mirabal Sisters Campus, one that is within walking distance to our school. Health & Wellness – The school has a full time nurse that attends to the medical needs of children with 504s and students referred to the clinic for minor colds and injuries. In addition to the mental health support students receive from the school’s social work and guidance counselor, mental health services are also available at the school through a partnership with Columbia Presbyterian hospital. Addressing students’ mental health needs helps remove the barriers to learning while at the same time providing the strategies the students need to self-regulate, problem-solve and focus on instruction. The Children’s Aid offers students in the after school yoga and zumba fitness classes, and their Go!Chefs program focuses on nutrition and healthy cooking clubs that culminate in an Iron Chefs competition at the end of the program year between other elementary school programs. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Children's Aid Target Population 140 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Extended Learning Time All youth in the Children's Aid after school will receive enrichment in the following areas and frequency: Literacy - 45min-2x/week Math - 45min-1x/week Fitness - 45min-2x/week SEL - 45min-2x/week 2018-19 CEP 55  Children's Aid/ Boston College City Connects K - 2nd grades Children's Aid Chronically absent students Homework - 30min5x/week Art - 45min - 2x/week Nutrition - 45min/2x/week By June 2019 90% of the students assessed by the City Connects Resource Coordinator and who are identified in tier 2 and/or 3 will receive action plans as well as developmentally appropriate intervention services. Assessment of all K-2nd grade students to identify and address needs based on a 3-tiered system from (1) low, (2a) mild, (2b) moderate, and (3) intensive. Success Mentors By June 2019, Success Mentors, together with the support from the school attendance team and Program Director will create and implement attendance improvement plans for students who were chronically absent in the prior year. As a result, attendance will improve by 30% for students assigned Success Mentors. Students receiving Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in the Children’s Aid after school program will sustain or improve their literacy skills by 2 levels in the DRA2. Children's Aid 2nd graders enrolled in the after school program Targeted Academic Intervention Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our community partnership, Children's Aid will leverage part time staff to support school day instruction for Pre-K students for 2.5 hours daily, Success Mentors will work with at risk and/or chronically absent students for 15 hours per week to encourage daily attendance in school, the Community School Director and Principal will have standing meetings weekly to discuss priority areas that include student performance, attendance, family and community engagement, collaboration, integration and service coordination, the CSD/or their designee will participate in all leadership meetings such as the SLT, School Safety, PPT, .and BRT. 2018-19 CEP 56  Children’s Aid after school will use the Kidzlit curriculum incorporating reading materials used during the school day to align, reinforce and strengthen learning through practice. Additionally, youth engaged in the Children’s Aid after school will receive social emotional learning objectives focused on our values rubric of work hard, focus, show love-be compassionate, create community and have fun-feel joy. To support children in this area, all youth in the after school will be assessed for resilience using the DESSA-mini and action plans will be created for youth categorized in Needs. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Recruitment for a Community School Director is in process. The Principal and Children's Aid deputy director/supervisor for the Washington Heights Community School Directors will interview prospective candidates with a the goal of on-boarding in mid-November to early December. Until the hire of the PS 152 Community School Director is completed, the supervisor will assume the role and responsibilities in the interim. 2. Students who participate in the Children’s Aid after school program receive academic enrichment in literacy, STEM, social emotional learning, nutrition and fitness. Another key component of Children's Aid program offerings after school is their Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in literacy focused on a cohort of second grade students. The students enrolled in TAI receive pre, interim and post assessments to gauge their progress as well as focus areas to ensure a comprehensive approach that supports the mastery of reading readiness skills that is aligned with the Common Core standards. To ensure maximum alignment with the school day, the after school program will utilize the 2018-19 CEP 57  results of the Diagnostic Reading Assessment 2(DRA2) completed by school for the students in the program at the beginning (BOY), middle (MOY), and end of the year (EOY). All of the participants in Children’s Aid are assessed via the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment (DESSA-mini) in order to identify student strengths in eight Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) categories: self-awareness, self-management, social-awareness, relationship skills, goal-directed behavior, personal responsibility, decision making, and optimistic thinking. Based on these assessments, students are grouped according to whether they were displaying strong SEL skills, typical SEL skills, or were in need of additional SEL supports. Action plans are then created for students identified in need of additional SEL support that calls for convening of program directors, facilitators, and parents to discuss the possible proactive strategies for participants using the PRIM (Pre-Referral Intervention Manual). The City Connects initiative will assess students in grades K-2nd and make appropriate referrals for intervention that include individual and/or group counseling, mental health treatment plans, and family support via the school social worker, guidance counselor, Columbia Presbyterian psychologist, external referral to community based mental health provider. Additionally, the school social worker will supervise an MSW student intern who works with individual as well as groups of students in need of social emotional, academic and mental health intervention. 3. Since its inception, Community School PS 152 had an open door policy and welcoming environment for families. The Parents Association (PA) is very active in the school and maintains a daily presence in support of parent inquiries, parent focused workshops and classes, and administrative support. Presently the following meetings are scheduled to engage families in support of their children’s education:  September Family Night: an opportunity for parents to become familiar with the curriculum and expectation for their child’s academic year ahead. For this year’s Family Night the school organized a Book Fair for students and their parents, and the PA prepared light snacks to welcome parents as they perused through the books.  Monthly Attendance Assemblies – to acknowledge students who are present every day, encourage others who are absent and send the message home regarding the importance of children attending school every day.  Thanksgiving Dinner Celebration – a gathering of families whose children participate in the Children's Aid programs where community is shared. All stakeholders, parents, CBO partners together with the school will work collaboratively to plan and execute the Community School Forum with the goal of engaging families and celebrating our work in partnership and support of student progress. 4. The Community School Principal and Community School Director will meet weekly on Thursdays for their regular check-in and partnership convening. In addition, partners (Principal, Community School Director, Assistant Principals, coaches, counseling staff as well as Columbia Presbyterian psychologist will meet to analyze attendance and academic data to identify needs and implement appropriate intervention and treatment plans. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP 58  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Children’s Aid – ELT academic literacy and math enrichment, targeted academic intervention, social emotional learning, youth leadership, parent engagement, City Connects K-2nd grades whole class and individual student reviews. Columbia Presbyterian School Based Mental Health Services – psychological and psychiatric evaluations and services, mental health counseling both individual and group. 2. The following personnel are members of the Community School Team: - Julia Pietri, Principal - Children's Aid Community School Director – TBD - David Grisevich, Assistant Principal - Stella Castillo, Assistant Principal - Maria Marte (Maridalia), Parents Association President - Parent Members - Ms. Bishop, UFT Representative Monthly meetings are scheduled to engage all stakeholders and focus on student progress, school climate, attendance and implementation of curricula. 3. Community School PS 152 will employ the following data strategies to ensure that the appropriate interventions are implemented to students in need: - Review attendance data, ATS and RESI weekly to provide appropriate and timely intervention in support of students attending school every day - Disaggregated student data, color-coded demographic data - School network system – download all student instructional assessments - Review instruction needs to prioritize curriculum and teacher teams’ use to plan uniformly across each grade 2018-19 CEP 59  - Review of NYSELAT and/or ELA tests scores as well as other internal assessments of student academic performance - Review of the DESSA-mini results of students in the Children's Aid after school program - Review of the DRA2 BOY, MOY and EOY results to ensure intervention is aligned with student needs based on grade level equivalency - Review of students in K-2nd grades tier levels assessed via the Children's Aid/Boston College City Connects initiative. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The resources needed to implement the Community School program include: Full time Community School Director Literacy and math student supports for targeted academic intervention Social worker, school guidance counselor, psychologist   Program Director  Data Specialist    Education Coordinator  Success Mentors Schedule adjustments include morning and early afternoon hours to allow for school day intervention for academic and attendance support. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our rationale is to have students engage in rigorous tasks focusing on building English Academic Vocabulary, accelerate language skills and content knowledge. This rationale is aligned the our school's Instructional Focus; “Language development by reading and writing with a purpose across content areas”, and our Key Focus Standards which were identified through analysis of NYS and school assessment data. Approximately one hundred (100) students will participate in a Mid-Winter, Title III Saturday ELL Academy. There will be six groups, each grade will have 2 groups, one Newcomer and one LTE. Each group will have 10 students and will be co-taught by two (2) certified teachers, ENL/Bil & CB. The Academy will focus on language ability, as evidenced by the EDAT and the 2016 NYSESLAT results. Instructional groupings will be done by using the EDAT. The duration of this Title III Academy, will be for seven Saturdays: January 7, 21, 28, February 4, March 4, 11, 18. Each session will be 4.5 hours, from 8:00AM - 12:30PM. The language of instruction will be English using ESL methodologies. Materials that will be used include non-fiction leveled texts across the content and the ESL program "Finish Line" Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for our Professional Development (PD) is to engage staff in methods to close the achievement gap identified by our students’ NYSESLAT results, our Key Focus Standards , and the school’s Instructional Focus. All teachers of ELLs across the building will receive the PD delineated below. The schedule and duration for this PD session are: on December 20, 2018, January 3 and 10, 2019. Training will take place after school, in one hour sessions facilitated by school building personnel. Topics to be covered will include: - how to use NYSESLAT scores and student writing to effectively drive instruction for ELL students - using SIOP strategies - selecting appropriate strategies to meet the needs for all ELLs 2018-19 CEP 62  Part C: Professional Development - developing language objectives - methods for students to be able to demonstrate their comprehension of conversational language - synthesize information - comprehend passages in different genres and responding to them verbally and in writing The professional development will be provided by the building ENL teachers and the Building Instructional coach. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for our Parent Engagement Activities is engage parents and families in every aspect of school life by creating a culture of collaborative learning with the school’s families to support both their children’s and their own English language acquisition. From September 2018 through June 2019, workshops and activities that encourage and support active participation to promote academic success are offered school-wide, multiple times each week. In cycles, inviting families, either by class or grade, the building instructional coach offers at minimum one hour workshops. Topics covered in these sessions/workshops include: differentiating instruction according to academic and language needs, helping students to reinforce the skills learned at school, technology at home, homework help, understanding child development, grade appropriate tasks, understanding curricula (ELA & Math), school programs for ELLs, understanding NYS Assessments, reinforcing academic and domain specific vocabulary. Additionally, our building CBO, The Children’s Aid Society offers both Fall and Spring cycles of “Mind in the Making” workshops that focus on child development and parenting in both English and Spanish. Each cycle is made up of 8 weekly, 2½ hour workshops. Our Parent Association also hosts ongoing weekly, 1 hour parent classes in Math and an ESL course that meets for 4 hours each Tuesday and Friday from February through May 2019. Our parent classes in ESL use the same methodologies as those which are employed for our ELL students. In addition to advancing the language acquisition skills of our parents, this course will provide our students' parents with skills to help their own children.The workshops and activities offered to parents and families are provided by, the building Instructional Coach, our Children’s Aid Partners, the PA President, Parent Coordinator, and other invited providers, to include representatives from the Cornell University Extension who offer personal health, social-cultural, and parenting workshops. Families are notified in their preferred oral and written languages of communication, via by back-packed flyers, phone calls that include robo-calls from the Instant Messengers service, Parent Association Meetings, and Parent Coordinator outreach. All notifications are also posted on the school's webpage. Translation and interpretation service are offered at all meetings for all parents as needed. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION CONCEPTUAL CONSOLIDATION 2018-19 CEP 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Dyckman Valley School Borough Manhattan School Number 152 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Julia Pietri Coach Inaya Assal ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sonia Kim Teacher/Subject Area Jenny Moon/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ji Hee You/ ENL Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Arlene Pedraza Coach School Counselor Rosa Moreno Parent Sandra Meises Parent Coordinator Vivana Ramirez Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 6 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 615 2018-19 CEP 65 Total number of ELLs 223 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 36.26%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 K 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 3 1 1 5 1 1 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 152 utilizes DRA2 to assess reading levels for grades K-5. MOSL, benchmark assessments in the beginning, middle, and end of the year from literacy curriculum (Harcourt Houghton Mifflin) are also used to assess literacy skills in reading and writing. The scores from these assessments show that our ELLs are performing below grade level in reading and writing. This DRA2 data, MOSL, and benchmark assessments help inform our school's instructional plan by diagnosing which literacy skills each child needs. The teachers use the information to guide their instruction in small group instruction, as well as the large group mini lessons as they align with the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have to ESL teachers and an F-Status Academic Intervention Service teacher to support these students. 2018-19 CEP 66  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ways in which we evaluate the success of the programs offered to our ELLs is use the data derived from the New York State ELA, Math, Science, as well as the data derived from the New York State English as Second Language Assessment Test. We also analyze the results from the DRA-2, MOSL, benchmark assessments, and the students’ writing portfolios. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have to ESL teachers and an F-Status Academic Intervention Service teacher to support these students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After analyzing ELA and NYSESLAT data in the past couple of years, it was apparent that most of the students were in need of strong Tier 1 instruction. Therefore, one of the biggest shifts was that students would not miss their Tier 1 instructional time. During Tier 1 instructional time, teachers provide opportunities for students to work and interact with pairs or groups to develop their language skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing. In addition, ENL is now more integrated and push-in at our school, therefore the ELLs are not missing their Tier 1 instruction. When a child is struggling with meeting classroom benchmarks, such as the results seen from classroom observations, unit assessments, or DRA levels being below grade level, the teacher and ENL teacher that is pushing in will meet those struggling students in a smaller group to scaffold their learning through different strategies, such as more explicit modeling or differtiation of materials or process. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We are seeing that from this past school year, there are not as many "Developing ELLs" and that many students are testing out by 4th grade. We also have more Transitioning and Expanding students this year than previous years, especially as the grades get higher. Typically, the students who have been receiving services for more than 3 years and scoring as Entering or Emergent, have been our students with disabilities. We are also seeing that there are more students who have attended Pre-K before entering kindergarten. Most of those students, though they may speak a home language other than English, have been scoring "Expanding" or "Commanding" in the NYSITELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have to ESL teachers and an F-Status Academic Intervention Service teacher to support these students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have put the ELLs in two class sections across each grade, enabling an easier push-in integrated unit as well as the pull-out standalone ENL unit. Typically, the ELLs in the classes are heterogeneous, but groupings for Standalone ENL are more homogeneous within the grade. There are only a couple of mixed grade groups, but they are placed together for Standalone ENL by proficiency level, and always no more than the span of two grades, unless it is a student with disability. Even then, it does not span more than 3 grade levels. The ENL teachers have been pushing into classes during ELA for the integrated unit to co-teach/support with the classroom teacher in the content area using ENL strategies. For the Standalone ENL unit, the ENL teachers have been pulling EN and EM students to provide smaller group instruction to meet their language acquisition needs. 2018-19 CEP 67  b. TBE program. If applicable. There is a transitional bilingual class in every grade, where the bilingual certified teacher provides ENL and HLA services within the school day, fulfilling the required hours for each child. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of PS 152 staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model. Home Language is used for instruction in the self contained TBE classes and to support the ELLs learning. Language allocation of 60/40, 50/50, 25/75 is selected according to the student’s level of English Language Proficiency. The home language for the students in our Transitional Bilingual Education class is Spanish. Each period is 52 minutes long and there are 6 instructional periods in a day. In order to ensure students receive the mandated minutes of ENL instruction as indicated by CR Part 152, students are placed in the ENL program as per their proficiency level and across grade levels. Students in our ENL program receive English language instruction as per CR Part 154 mandates through Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL: 360 minutes for Entering and Emerging students, 180 ESL minutes for Transitioning and Expanding students, and 90 minutes for Commanding students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In Freestanding ENL, our integrated units' instructional model uses the Balanced Literacy through the Houghton-Mifflin Harcourt curriculum, along with the Common Core aligned writing units. In the Standalone ENL unit, language acquisitions are addressed more intensively through materials that are designed for ELLs as well as materials the ENL teachers have modified to make the language more comprehensible. In addition, differentiation of instruction is at the core of all our teaching. This approach enables the ENL teachers to reach the needs of all our ELL students individually. Individual teacher/student conferences, differentiated tasks, content and language objectives, and targeted mini lessons are utilized to address the specific learning and language needs of our ELL population. Some examples of these approaches are: Read Alouds, Independent Reading and Writing, Shared and Guided reading instruction, and Academic Vocabulary Development. All instructional decisions and planning for each program are based on the analysis of student data, such as benchmark assessments, DRA2, unit tests, teacher created assessments, informal observations, and student work. All our teachers are provided with the opportunity to receive ongoing professional development on how to use data to differentiate instruction. Teachers also meet in teacher teams, assigned by grade level, to analyze this data and discuss instructional strategies to best help our students. In addition, the home language for the students in our Transitional Bilingual Program is Spanish. Both Native (Spanish) and English Language instruction in this program are aligned with the NYSED Language Allocation Policy. All classes differentiate instruction based on individual student language proficiency levels and academic achievement (i.e. whole group instruction, small group instruction, one to one conferencing and differentiated tasks). The English Language proficiency levels for all ELL students are measured yearly with the administration of the NYSESLAT. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our pedagogical personnel ensure that the progress of our ELL students is consistently monitored. In the TBE classes, the students are assessed through Spanish literacy benchmarks from the curriculum (Houghton-Mifflin Harcourt) as well as take the ELE at the end of the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 68  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, the SIFE are speakers of Spanish, and therefore placed into TBE classrooms. The TBE teacher differentiates instruction for SIFE by supporting the student in their native language to help them develop higher levels of their home language skills while they acquire English. These students follow the 60\40 model of language allocation throughout the school day. Teachers are notified as to who their SIFE are so that they can plan accordingly by using home language materials as well as English materials, both at the level that is appropriate for the student. If a SIFE that speaks a language other than Spanish, and there is no teacher that speaks that home language, the challenge is to provide them with materials in English at their level to provide intense literacy and language instruction in small groups, as well as provide them with external resources such as educational websites. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All instruction for ELL-SWDs is differentiated as per Individual Educational Plan. Classroom, SETTS, and ENL teachers modify curriculum and materials to differentiate instruction for the ELL-SWD students. For example, the ELA curriculum comes with an ELL component that has modified language, yet target the same skills and vocabulary. ENL teachers use these materials, along with other grade appropriate materials and scaffold their learning through use of graphic organizers, visual aids, explicit vocabulary instruction, and modeling. Also, many of our ELL-SWDs are placed in ICT classrooms, in order to provide the extra support needed for the children. Throughout the content areas, there is an increase of instructional scaffolding through the use of mini-lessons, conferencing and graphic organizers. For K-3, students are supported with Orton Gillingham/Reading Reform strategies and instruction. All ELL-SWD students are also exposed to grade level texts in the content areas of Social Studies and Science as shared readings. Technology software is also used to differentiate and provide grade level activities through Waterford in K-2 and ST Math in grades 2-5. These learning software programs are provided as intervention across the whole school to focus on phonics and brain based thinking. In addition, the use of SMART technology in the classrooms support ELL-SWDs, with use of various interactive activities and lessons. All instruction for ELL-SWDs is differentiated as per Individual Educational Plan. Classroom, SETTS, and ENL teachers modify curriculum and materials to differentiate instruction for the ELL-SWD students. Many of our ELL-SWDs are placed in ICT classrooms, in order to provide the extra support needed for the children. Throughout the content areas, there is an increase of instructional scaffolding through the use of mini-lessons, conferencing and graphic organizers. For K-3, students are supported with Orton Gillingham/ Reading Reform strategies and instruction. All ELL-SWD students are also exposed to grade level texts in the content areas of Social Studies and Science as shared readings. Technology software is also used to differentiate and provide grade level activities through Waterford in K-2 and ST Math in grades 2-5. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency, students benefit from differentiated instruction that is data driven. Students receive literacy instruction in small guided reading groups and literature circles. Teacher and students schedules are monitored so ELL-SWDs lose as little mainstream instructional time as possible. With the new revision of CR-Part 154, where half the instructional minutes must be integrated ENL, ELL-SWDs will not lose as much instructional classroom time as previous years because the ENL teacher will be co-teaching in the classrooms. When there is a need to pull a student out during a content area for Stand Alone ENL, every effort is made to provide ENL services through this area of instruction. Mainstream, Special Education Service providers , and ESL teachers articulate in order to continuously monitor students progress in all academic areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 69  A part time ELA Academic Intervention Teacher provides intervention reading services to ELL students in grades 3, 4 and 5 in English. Targeted students are provided services in English Language Arts, depending upon individual assessments such as the DRA2 and Beginning of the Year Benchmark Assessments. ELLs with 4-6 years of service, as well as ELL-SWDs, are invited to attend Saturday Academy. All ELLs in our school also receive math intervention through ST Math, which is provided twice a week in the computer labs. ELLs in K-2 also participate in Waterford Early Literacy Software program twice a week to work on their math and reading skills as a form of intervention in English. Specific targeted interventions for Science and Social Studies are not provided in small group settings. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs will be implemented this school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the present time, there are no plans to discontinue any of the ELL programs or services in place. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all programs available in the school. ELLs in grades 2-5 are invited to participate in the Saturday Academy offered throughout the winter and spring. All ELLs also have access to the technology lab through ST Math (grades 2-5) and Waterford (K-2) programs. Children's Aid offers an after school enrichment and academic program, which is available to ELLs in our school. Flyers are sent to all students in the school in English and in Spanish to invite the parents to register their child in the CAS after school program. There are 140 students currently enrolled in the program, 41 of which are ELLs. The CAS staff provide enrichment and academic support in English and in Spanish, as all the students currently enrolled speak only English and/or Spanish. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms throughout the school use technology, in one form or another, to support our ELLs in the classroom and content areas. Interactive SMART boards are available in many classrooms for teachers to use to provide visual support, as well as use interactive activities to complement their lessons. The ELA curriculum (HMH) provides interactive grammar and reading skills activities for the SMART board, which the teachers use to support their ELLs and SWDs. The computer lab and iPads are available for use by the whole school through ST Math and Waterford, which differentiates and individualizes to students' needs. The ELA (HMH), GoMath, and Social Studies materials are available in Spanish for bilingual students. Though the science textbooks are not available in Spanish, the Science teacher supplements her program with Spanish language instruction and materials for the bilingual classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language support is delivered in the Traditional bilingual Education program through the home language literacy periods. Additionally, among other methods in both TBE and ENL classes, are the following: language objectives, linguistic lesson summaries, frequent use of cognates, realia, peer support. Home language materials are available for student use such as Spanish and Arabic dictionaries, Picture dictionaries, Spanish classroom libraries, and content area textbooks (ELA, Math and Social Studies). These are typically used in the TBE classrooms, however, ENL teachers and students have access to these materials as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that the required services, supports and resources correspond to the needs of the ELLs by teachers providing services to the ELLs according to their grade level and ages. Groupings do not span more than 2 grade levels. Additionally, grade appropriate curricular resources for the specific ELL groups are used in all content areas. The ENL and classroom teachers support their ELLs by scaffolding and differentiating materials and assignments based on their language needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 70  All classrooms throughout the school use technology, in one form or another, to support our ELLs in the classroom and content areas. Interactive SMART boards are available in many classrooms for teachers to use to provide visual support, as well as use interactive activities to complement their lessons. The ELA curriculum (HMH) provides interactive grammar and reading skills activities for the SMART board, which the teachers use to support their ELLs and SWDs. The computer lab and iPads are available for use by the whole school through ST Math and Waterford, which differentiates and individualizes to students' needs. The ELA (HMH), GoMath, and Social Studies materials are available in Spanish for bilingual students. Though the science textbooks are not available in Spanish, the Science teacher supplements her program with Spanish language instruction and materials for the bilingual classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Most newly enrolled ELL students are identified at the beginning of their enrollment. These students are identified during registration through the ELL identification process. However, if registration occurs in the spring for incoming kindergarteners or the summer for the upper grades, there are no specific activities to assist these newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. As for the students who enroll throughout the school year, besides support provided on an individual needs basis by the teachers, parent coordinator, or counselor, there are no specific activities provided for newly enrolled ELLs at our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As an elementary school, we presently do not offer electives for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 152M offers a series of professional development for its teachers. With the revised regulations, the school will be providing all staff with ELL-related professional development, making up 15% of their PD hours. Some of these hours may be provided by the school's two ENL teachers to address the needs of the ELLs. To meet the mandatory hours for ENL teachers, additional professional development to our ENL and bilingual teachers is provided in the areas of scaffolding for ELLs and differentiated instruction. ENL Teachers meet weekly with teacher teams to discuss and share strategies to be implemented with their groups as well as in the mainstream classroom, where they also analyze student data and discuss curriculum. They also discuss the Common Core Learning Standard aligned writing units, to be aware of what the expectations are for the ELLs. In addition, they partake in faculty meetings and professional development that support the staff with CCLS implementation. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 71  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to ensure a successful student transition to middle school, our school staff is informed of middle school programs for our ELL population. the guidance counselor is instrumental in providing Professional Development to our staff with regard to expectations and procedures. We also keep the staff updated as to middle school fairs so that parents may be well informed when asking a staff member for guidance. As per CR Part 154.2, 15% of total professional development hours for all teachers will be provided in school during professional development days, as well as during professional time on Mondays. In addition, ENL teachers are encouraged to attend professional development courses offered by the DOE and borough offices to fulfill their required hours. Teachers are responsible to keep records of professional hours through archiving agendas on their own. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In the upcoming school year, the ENL teachers will invite parents to come in during parent involvement time on Tuesdays after school to meet individually to discuss the student's goals, development progress, and any test results from the spring's NYSESLAT at least once a year. If translation is needed, the bilingual supervisor/assistant principal will be available to interpret and translate. If the parent cannot make it on a Tuesday, the ENL teachers will accommodate the parent by meeting before school or after school any other day. When this is not possible, a phone conference will be made. ENL teachers will keep records of sign-ins as well as the letters sent home to invite the parents for the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. (Response for #2): Each ENL teacher is responsible for keeping a log of parent meetings for their students. When meeting with the parents, in the invitation letter sent home, it will ask if the parent needs translation services. If this is the case, we will ask the bilingual coordinator/assistant principal to translate if the preferred language is Spanish. Otherwise, we will offer to provide translation through the over the phone translation services offered by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Records for general parent meetings that are held by the ENL teachers with the bilingual coordinator/assistant principal are maintained by the ENL teachers and kept in the ENL Compliance binder. (Response for #3) Parent involvement at PS 152 is an integral part of our school community. We have an active Parent Association that works closely with classroom teachers and the school in various school-wide events, such as Bear Day, kindergarten and 5th grade graduation. Additionally, the parent coordinator is informed of the admission of new ELLs to our school, in order to address the personal needs of these parents. Parent volunteering opportunities are also available, upon completing Learning Leaders training. The Parent Association also runs courses such as English and Zumba during the day throughout the week. In addition, they run parent workshops with the guidance counselor on topics such as behavior and counseling, as well as technology and math workshops with the math coach. As always, language interpretation is offered in Spanish through Spanish speaking pedagogues/ administrators, as well as through over the phone translation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-19 CEP 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Julia Pietri, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dyckman Valley School School DBN: 06M152 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Julia Pietri Title Principal Arlene Pedraza Assistant Principal Viviana Ramirez Parent Coordinator Jenny Moon/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Marte (Maridalia) Parent JiHee You/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Inaya Assal Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 6/26/16 1/1/01 6/26/16 07/01/18 6/26/16 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M152 School Name: PS 152M, DyckmanValley School Superintendent: ManuelRamirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Stella Castillo Assistant Principal N/A YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. -Staff members conducting interviews for HLIS forms, note family's preferred language of communication -ATS reports are downloaded twice a year to ensure communicative accessibility to all families. -Families are asked to provide "translator" on student emergency cards, in case of urgency. -Families are provided with access to NYCDOE translation unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral -English -English -English -English -English 2018-19 CEP 76  -Spanish -Urdu -Arabic -Spanish -Urdu -Arabic -Spanish -Urdu -Arabic -Spanish -Urdu -Arabic -Spanish -Urdu -Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? -Parent Teacher conference announcements-to be distributed two weeks and one week prior to meetings. -Family Workshop announcements , presentation and materials-to be distributed one week and two days prior to workshops. -NYS and school testing information-to be distributed one week prior to event. Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. September, November, March and May Translated in house or by vendor September, November, March and May Translated in house or by vendor September, February Translated in house or by vendor -School calendar and events September Translated in house or by vendor -School specific academic programs- to be distributed one week before presentations. -Curriculum information and night- to be distributed within two weeks of the beginning of the school year. September-October Translated in house or by vendor September-October Translated in house or by vendor -Letters from school leadership-to be distributed as needed All year round -Letters from teachers-to be distributed as needed. All year round -School Website All year round Translated in house or by vendor Translated in house or by vendor Translated with Google Translate online 2018-19 CEP 77  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? -Guidance Counselor outreach to parents- as needed All year round Translated in house or by vendor -Middle School Information session- held in first week of October April - June Translated in house or by vendor -Curriculum Night-second week of September as determined by NYCDOE -Parent Involvement meeting, conducted on a weekly basis. September, November, March and May Translated in house or by vendor All year round Translated in house or by vendor 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We reach our parents in the following ways: -Robo calls utilizing School Messenger which has a translation feature -School website which uses google translate -School mailings which are translated in-house when possible or sent to a vendor for translation -We use the translation unit for translators during parent meetings Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All chancellors regulations are given to school staff at the beginning of the year in their welcome back packet and are included in the staff handbook. We go over this regulation along with others. 2018-19 CEP 78  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) -Language needs are assessed within the first 30 days of the academic year. Families are thereby provided all pertinent materials in their language of choice. We do have a sign posted in the main entrance and main office letting parents know about their right to language assistance services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? -Language needs are informally assessed by the Parents' Association at each monthly meeting. -In order to reflect upon school protocols, parents are asked to complete survey at the end of the academic year. 2018-19 CEP 79 
