2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M183 School Name: P.S. 183 ROBERT L. STEVENSON Principal: MARTIN WOODARD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 183, Robert L. Stevenson 310200010183 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 02M183 419 East 66 th Street New York, NY 10065 (212)734-7719 Phone Number: (212)861-8314 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Martin Woodard mwoodard@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Martin Woodard Hillary Weil JoslinParadise Michael Ekstract N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Bonnie LaBoy Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, Room 713, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: BLaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: ( 212) 356-3739 Phone Number: (212) 356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646)470-0721 Phone Number: (917)339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Martin Woodard Hillary Weil Joslin Paradise N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Michael Ekstract Christina Mota Fritz Donnelly *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent/Chair Member/Parent/ Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marci Kaplan Allison Anderson Kathy Spergl RandiSchey Arielle Lowe Courtney Piotrowski Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 183 is a collaborative learning environment dedicated to providing academically rigorous and standards-based instruction to its students, while maintaining a child-centered approach to learning. At P.S. 183, we strongly believe that each child brings a unique gift and it is our intent to develop individual strengths. We have consistently high expectations of all students; our staff members foster a learning environment where 2018-19 CEP 9  students feel confident to take risks and work to their potential. We have Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classrooms on each grade, which adheres to our school’s child-centered and inclusive philosophy of addressing the needs of all children. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 183 is a district school serving approximately 549 students in pre-kindergarten through fifth grade. With our proximity to Memorial-Sloan Kettering, New York Presbyterian Hospital and Rockefeller University, many of our parents are physicians and/or research scientists who come from all over the world to be here. Our neighborhood families create a school community, which uniquely highlights the diversity of New York City. This extremely supportive and dedicated community of families volunteer their time, money and expertise to enrich and enhance the school, helping to create a welcoming learning environment. Our school organizes events for families- math mornings, publishing celebrations, PTA meetings with instructional focus, newsletters/websites to communicate about instructional program and share resources to support students. Our curriculum reflects standards and targets the individual needs of students. We have a balanced curriculum program which addresses the needs of a variety of learners (i.e. high-achieving, English Language Learners, intervention) using a workshop model. Our curriculum is aligned with the Next Generation Standards. As a school, we provide multiple opportunities to engage in professional collaborations. Teachers share best instructional strategies to positively impact student outcomes through teacher led collaborative inquiry groups. Teachers have opportunities to participate in grade level and school-wide planning. Teachers participate in a multitude of structures that deepen pedagogy including lab-sites, inter-visitations, mentoring, teacher team meetings, and professional development with outside consultants. School leaders clearly articulate expectations to staff, students and families. Teachers work with our literacy and math coaches to develop tasks that require students to apply their content knowledge, develop theories and explain thinking. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We celebrate the diverse backgrounds and the 40 plus languages spoken by our student population who at times need the services of our full-time ENL instructor. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. With the introduction of the Framework for Great Schools, we have identified strengths such as our professional, collaborative learning environment and the rigorous instruction we deliver. We aim to increase the resources we share with families to further strengthen our home-school partnership and increase our partnerships with community organizations. This year in particular, we are implementing a word study program, K-2, as well as studying and developing an extension of that word study program in grades 3-5. Also, we are continuing our work with using a consistent writing rubric, developed by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, school wide. Our work this year 2018-19 CEP 10  will center on using the Teachers College Reading and Writing rubrics and the new phonics curriculum to target special populations of writers and readers (ENLs, SWDs, and High Achieving Students) and developing lessons/strategies for effectively moving them as writers and readers. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M183 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 588 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 20 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 11.0% % Attendance Rate 10.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 8.8% 68.0% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 87.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES YES N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES YES N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 86 86 96.0% 0.9% 15.5% 2.4% 16.7% 4.1% 2 0% 5.1 87.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our last Quality Review in 2015 indicated Rigorous Instruction as an “area of celebration” for our school. The report also indicated, “ The schools’ curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and offers meaningful learning experiences that promote higher-order skills to improve student learning.” On the 2017-2018 PPO feedback, our curriculum alignment to CCLS and tasks provided students to engage in opportunities to engage in learning, and teaching practices across classrooms are aligned to the curricula and reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. This is now our 7th year as a school using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units for Reading and Writing. This has built a consistency in lessons and skills across classrooms and across grades, K-5. This is reflected in our ELA and Math, NYS Test Scores. For 2017, 81% of our third, fourth and fifth graders achieved at either a level 3 or 4 in both literacy and math. 2. However, in examining our June Instructional Report for 2018, one continues to see a slow progression of progress on the ELA in Writing to Sources, the Day 2 portion of the ELA where students construct short and long responses to reading passages. In 2016, for example, third graders were .16 above city average, acquiring 62% of points possible. In 2018, they were .19 above the city average, acquiring 74% of points possible. In grade 4, we increased in .06 above city average in 2016 to .16, a jump from 78% to 80% of points possible in writing, above city average. On the 2017 Item Analysis, looking at students in grades 3 and 4, on the ELA, 12 third graders were classified as Special Education. Only 1 out of 12 students scored at the proficient level on the constructed response essay. In Grade 4, 15 students were classified as Special Education. 8 received a 3 or 4 on the constructed response. Overall ELA results from 2016 and 2017 show a decrease in the number of special education students scoring a 1 or 2 on the ELA, 57% in 2016 and 44% in 2017. On the 2017-2018 Measures of Leadership Practice, it was noted in the areas for improvement that special education students should be a target sub-group for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of all special education students and students identified in the lower third will score, overall, at grade level or above in at least 2 out of 3 writing domains (Structure, Development, or Language Conventions) in each of the three writing genres - Narrative, Opinion, Information, as measured on the Teachers College Reading and Writing On-Demand Writing Rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers meet monthly in grade teams with Literacy Coach. Teachers will give 6 On-Demand writing assessments throughout the school year. ENL, Special Education, and other relevant subgroups of students will be examined at the meetings. Based on their writing, teachers will devise 2-3 small group teaching points that teachers will implement between the next meeting. Students will input student growth in a tracking tool designed by the grade. Meetings take place monthly as a team and also Mondays, after school, during our 80 minute professional development section. Special Education Students, Lowest Third, K-5 Oct-June 2019 Literacy Coach, Intervention Staff, School Leaders, Classroom Teachers Our Teachers College RW Consultants, Twice a Week Literacy Coach, and our Special Education Coach will meet with teams on a regular basis to study topics related to student writing, with an emphasis on working with key subgroups, especially ENL and Special Education Students. Teachers will use the Teachers College Reading and Writing On Demand writing rubrics and student checklists to measure and monitor progress six times a year. This rubric will also be used to gauge teaching strategies and mini-lesson teaching points when teachers meet monthly in grade teams. Special Education Students and Lowest Third K-5 Families will attend end of unit publishing parties to see growth of students in their writing. Families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October - June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Literacy Coaches, Consultants Admin, Teachers, Families September 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will have the opportunity to attend PTA meetings and school events to support their understanding of students and their writing growth. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PTA funds allocated to Per Diem to cover substitute teacher costs during workshops and planning days  NYSTL (New York State Tax Levy) Textbook funds for Professional Texts  Grant funds to attend professional development opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Reviewing Grade Level Meeting agendas in January to indicate Professional Development Time is dedicated towards looking at sub-group of students in writing and lesson plans/small group topics being planned and discussed. 2.Teachers will identify the 5 students in their class who represent their subgroups - ENL, Special Education, Lower Third, and Higher Third. They will score these students 6 times against the TC Writing Rubric to note progress towards achieving grade level standards. 3. Running Records are collected and analyzed 4 times a year (October, January, April, June). Admin and teachers will review student reading progress to see correlations between their writing and reading progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Writing Rubrics and Check-lists for Information, Narrative, and Opinion Writing. This is the K-5 writing rubric our school uses to measure student progress in writing towards benchmark standards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. On the 2017-2018 Measures of Leadership Practice report, it was noted that Learning Environment was a strength. It was noted that, "As a new school leader, you recognize the importance of building a culture of mutual trust. You model and guide the school community towards a culture of respect by maintaining a positive, inclusive attitude. You communicate monthly through your principal's newsletters to reiterate school-wide goals. You have organized a book of the month for students and families that support social emotional development of students. Your approach to culture building and social-emotional support results in a safe environment that is conducive to student and adult learning." In addition, on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide ES data sheet, we scored a 92% on the school survey for Supportive Environment and a 96% in the area of Trust. 2. To continue to support teachers in creating a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged, we would like to see an increase in the number of teachers who receive a Highly Effective in the Danielson domain of 2A (Creating and Environment of Respect and Rapport) and 2D (Managing Student Behavior). This past year, 53% of staff scored overall Effective in 2A and 53% overall effective in 2D. 65% scored Highly Effective in 2A and 46% in 2D. 3. This summer, a team of teachers and I traveled to Yale University to train in the RULER program for Social and Emotional Intelligence. Not only does the program teach emotional regulation for students, it also helps adults examine their own emotions and effects these bring into our teaching and interactions with students. This group of teachers will in turn, turn-key and train our staff in the RULER program for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of teachers will increase from effective to highly effective in both 2A and 2D based on implementation of the YALE RULER training as measured on formal and informal observations using the Danielson Rubric. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will conduct an initial round of observations in the fall, with a focus on 2A and 2D. Beginning of the year conversations will ask teachers to reflect on how they build respect and rapport in the classroom and develop structures and routines to manage students and support independence. Teachers were asked in their IPC to name a child they would be a champion for this yer and how they would create a classroom to support that child. Children selected ranged from high performing, to ENL, Special Education students. Teachers will participate in a series of professional development cycles with regards to the RULER training received at Yale, over the summer. Staff who attend the RULER training will begin to work with admin to plan turn-key workshops and sessions during the Monday PD time and Back to School PD for staff. The cycle will begin with the September PD on opening day to introduce the components of Emotional Intelligence. At the Election Day PD, teachers will study the two anchor components of the program - the Student Charter and the Mood Meter. Beginning in January, each Monday PD session will begin by asking teachers to think about the mood meter in regards to their day. In May, teachers will use Monday PD time to plan out the classroom rollout for the program. At the June Chancellor's day PD, teachers will plan activities for September, October, and November that will introduce and teach the RULER program to their students. Special Education teachers will work with RULER trainers, our special education consultants, and administration to adapt lessons and strategies to support students with Special Needs, especially students with Behavior Implementation Plans. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September to June 2019. All students K-5, Teachers under the Advance Rating System Classroom Teachers School Leaders Social Emotional Committee Members All Students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration and Staff who Attended YALE training in Summer IEP students K-5 September -June 2019 Class Teachers, Special Education Teachers, Administration, and Special Education Consultant 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend workshops that explain the RULER training and how they can support their own child's social and emotional development at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PTA grant to pay for the summer RULER training at YALE University for 2 teachers (both from an ICT setting) and 1 administrator  TL and grant funds allocated to Per Diem to cover substitute teacher costs during workshops and planning days. --Funds from PTA will be used to pay for Special Education Professional Development from Goldmansour and Rutherford consultants. Focus will be on adapting RULER training for special needs students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Informal observations and formal observations looking for evidence of implementing RULER training and elements of 2A and 2D. 2. Advance data will be analyzed three times (November, February, and April) a year to monitor trends in the domain of 2A and 2D 3. Beginning and Mid Year Conversations with teachers will talk about their ability to build respect and rapport with students and build structures and routines in their classroom that support student independence and social/emotion development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher ratings in the component of 2A- "Creating and Environment of Respect and Rapport" and 2D -"Managing Student Behavior." Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. On the 2017-2017 School Quality Guide 88% of teachers felt they work in an collaborative environment. 92% felt they work in a supportive environment. 91% stated they collaborate with their peers for planning and support. Time is built into the schedule for weekly grade team meetings, one dedicated with the literacy coach and the other with the math coach, monthly. Our school has TC Reading and Writing Consultants, a Special Education Consultant, and money set aside for outside professional development. All first and second year teachers pair up with a staff member for monthly mentoring. 2. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, only 77% of teachers felt the professional development for the year was of quality. This year, per diem funds were set aside to create a professional development committee to plan and implement inquiry and cycles of studies for the staff. A professional development survey was sent to all staff members regarding topics they felt were important to study as a school. Of the 27 responses, 55% felt that developing and studying a word study and grammar program, K-5 is a strong area of need for our students. Our Pupil Personnel Team found that over 50% of students in grades K-2 who were recommended for support needed phonemic awareness in order to achieve grade level reading benchmarks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in a yearlong study examining and implementing the Teachers College Reading and Writing project K-2 word study and build a 3-5 grammar curriculum to support all students in developing phonemic awareness and an understanding of grade level conventions as measured by agendas, professional development cycle plan for the year, and sign in sheets at meetings. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the Monday PD time teachers will work in grade bands with members of the Professional Development Committee to study and plan lessons using the Teachers College Word Study Program and the Power of Grammar lessons. Teachers will bring student writing to the meeting at check points in the year to analyze trends and notice which areas of the word study and grammar programs are making an impact in student reading and writing. We have planned the Monday PD time to be devised into three different 6-8 week Monday Cycles. For the K-2 phonics, this will focus on planning/creating structures for Phonics in our classroom, looking at the Phonics assessments and studying student writing and running records for evidence of instruction, and the last cycle will look at small group instruction with phonics for students who need additional support. For 3-5 Grammar, our first cycle will center around reading about grammar instruction for best practice understanding, the second cycle will be to teach a series of lessons and note effectiveness in student writing, the final cycle will look at building teaching points and grade appropriate skills 3-5 into our TC writing units. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and School Leaders and Students September - June 2019 Teachers School Leaders TC Consultants Literacy Coach Professional Development Committee Members Administration Meetings will be held with the Literacy Coach, TC Consultants and Professional Development Committee members monthly to assist in the planning and monitoring of progress. Teachers and School Leaders September - June 2019 School Leaders TC Consultants Literacy Coach PD Committee Teachers September -June 2019 TC Consultants, School Leaders Two teachers are participating in a specialty study group at Teachers College on Grade 2 word study and grades 3-5 study around teaching students grammar in the workshop setting. Teachers will also attend various calendar days at Teachers College with regards to word study and grammar training. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 21  Information about the TC Word Study program and our work on building a K-5 grammar/conventions curriculum will be shared with parents at Publishing Parties, PTA meetings, and Principal Monthly letters to families. Workshops, lead by Literacy Coach and staff will educate parents around phonemic awareness and grammar development in students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TL & Grant funds allocated to Per Diem to cover substitute teacher costs during workshops and planning days  PTA grant funds to attend professional development opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. November Election Day PD will be used for teachers to bring recent Running Records and On-Demand Writing assessments to note phonemic development in reading and language/convention usage in writing. On Demand writing assessments and running records, collected 4 times a year, will be used to monitor student achievement with the program. Meeting agendas and sign in sheets will be used to track staff participation in professional development sessions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. With the implementation of a consistent word study and grammar program, we will see progress as measured by Teachers College Reading and Writing Running Records and a decrease in referrals for phonemic awareness in Pupil Personnel Meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our last Quality Review in 2015 indicated Rigorous Instruction as an “area of celebration” for our school. The report also indicated, “ The schools’ curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and offers meaningful learning experiences that promote higher-order skills to improve student learning.” On the 2017-2018 PPO feedback, our curriculum alignment to CCLS and tasks provided students to engage in opportunities to engage in learning, and teaching practices across classrooms are aligned to the curricula and reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. This has built a consistency in lessons and skills across classrooms and across grades, K-5. This is reflected in our ELA and Math, NYS Test Scores. For 2017, 81% of our third, fourth and fifth graders achieved at either a level 3 or 4 in both literacy and math. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 92% of teachers responded positively towards questions on the School Survey that related directly to Supportive Environment. 90% of teachers responded positively towards questions on the School Survey that related to Effective School Leadership. 2. While NYS ELA results from 2016 and 2017 show a decrease in the number of special education students scoring a 1 or 2 on the ELA, 57% in 2016 and 44% in 2017, it is still a target population of our school that is an area of focus. According to end of year analysis of Pupil Personnel Team referrals, over 50% of students discussed at PPT in grades K-2, were reading below grade level because they had difficulty with phonemic awareness. On the 2017-2018 Measures of Leadership Practice, it was noted in the areas for improvement that special education students should be a target sub-group for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of Special Education teachers and Paraprofessionals will be trained to use the SPIRE reading program in their classrooms to support at-risk students, ENL's and special education students reading below grade level as measured by progress on Teachers College Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Our SETTS teacher and Early Intervention teacher have been trained to use the SPIRE reading program. Starting in September, both teachers will train paraprofessionals and special education teachers working in ICT teams in using the program using our Special Education meetings on Tuesday and Monday Professional Development. As training becomes available, Special Education teachers will be sent to SPIRE training. In October and January, Administration, SETTS teacher, Literacy Coach, Intervention Teacher and Special Education teachers will review running records of Special Education students, ENL students, and lowest third to plan intervention groups and determine who would benefit from SPIRE reading intervention. We have developed 4 cycles of intervention - each lasting 7-8 weeks. After each cycle, the intervention team meets to discuss student progress and suggest further interventions and adjust students in the groups. Master building schedule for the 2018-2019 school year allows blocks of time, twice a week, when grades do not have prep and therefore, special education teachers in ICT can pull at-risk, ENLs and Special Education students for SPIRE reading program support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September -June 2019 SETTS Provider, Early Intervention Provider, Administration, Literacy Coach September -June 2019 Administration October - June 2019 Special Education Teachers, Literacy Coach, Administration, SETTS teacher January -June 2019 Special Education Teachers, Administration At Risk Students, ENL students, Special Education Students, Special Education Teachers Special Education Teachers Literacy Coach, Special Education Teachers, Struggling Readers - especially SWDs, and ENLs. Special Education Teachers, Special Education Students, ENL students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families who's children are receiving additional reading intervention through the SPIRE reading program will meet with teachers to learn about the program, the supports being offered, and ways to support literacy development at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TL Funds for full-time literacy teacher, F-Status Literacy Coach, and SETSS provider  Scheduling to free up Special Education teachers for Intervention work during the school day 2018-19 CEP 24   PTA grant funds for professional development opportunities outside of 183. Title III Funds to fund after school reading program from January to April to provide an additional hour of small group reading instruction for SWDs, ENLs, and students not meeting benchmark reading levels. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Initial Analysis of 2018 ELA test results and June 2018 End of Year reading assessments to target any students entering the school year reading below grade level. -Those students receiving intervention, noting progress on formal and informal Teachers College Running Records - October, January, April, June -January and June analysis of PPT referrals for students reading below benchmark standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College Reading Running Records to note reading levels - October, January, April, and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the recent 2016-2017 Quality Snapshot, 95% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. 94% of parents feel that teachers understand families problems and concerns, and 100% of teachers say that teachers work closely with families to meet student needs. 2. Our SLT developed a 2017-2018 parent survey with regards to quality of school events, ways to engage more parents, and prioritize topics they would like the school to present more information on. With over 200 parents surveyed, 78% of responses requested more information on ways to help parents support their child's social and emotional well being. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of Families will participate in a variety of school events that educate families on ways to support their child both academically and socially as measured by agendas and sign-in sheets at events. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The School Leadership Team will continue to offer school-based events aimed to promote our academic vision and support students socially/emotionally. Students, Classroom Teachers September - June 2019 SLT members, School Leaders Staff Committee Members PTA Executive Board Classroom Teachers, Families, School Leaders September - June 2019 Classroom Teachers, School Leaders Coaches Consultants Administration will work with our Professional Development Committee, Social/Emotional Committee, PTA and ELL teacher to engage parents in school-wide events. Families will have an opportunity to attend Math Mornings in their child’s classroom 4x a year, and Literacy Mornings at a minimum 4x year. The focus on Math Mornings will help parents to continue to unpack the math curriculum in order to offer supports at home, when working with their children. Literacy mornings will support the new TC Word Study curriculum. Parents in ICT classrooms will be given additional supports by Special Education for working with their children who have special needs. ELL teacher will continue to offer ENL families workshops on how to strengthen their home/school connection. Social/Emotional Committee will train parents in the new RULER program. PTA meetings will feature speakers that address children's social and emotional development. Teachers will share newsletters or update their classroom website, at minimum 1x a month, to support our home-school partnership. Classroom Teachers, Families, September -June 2019 Classroom Teachers Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The School Leadership Team will continue to work with the PTA and Administration to use the recent SLT Survey results to plan school-wide events addressing the needs of the community. This will involve partnering with professional speakers and CBOs. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA funds dedicated towards planning events and paying for speakers Per-Session funds for staff to plan and present information to parents at evening meetings and PTA meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Monitor parent sign-in sheets at classroom Math Mornings, Publishing Parties and PTA meetings/special speakers at the January SLT meeting to note level of participation. ●Parent feedback via school survey created by the SLT for Spring planning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets (class lists with sign-in) will be used to track attendance and to measure the level of participation for classroom events, PTA meetings, and Speakers dealing with Social/Emotional development. SLT created surveys distributed via Google Forms to school community identifying the opportunities provided and feedback from participants. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Upon meeting with the Pupil Personnel Team and reviewing the student’s response to Tier I intervention a student may qualify for academic intervention. Student work/documentation is reviewed to determine the targeted intervention service. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) a. Small group School day b. Small group c. Small group d. One to one e. Group/one to one Differentiated instruction in all classes – Tier I Includes: a. Repeated exposure to practice skills b. Pre-teaching concepts c. Guided Reading/Strategy Lessons d. Conferences e. Modified materials -Tier 2 Includes: a) Wilson & Spire Reading Program b) Sounds in Motion c) Fountas and Pinnell Intervention System d) Intervention Teacher Gr. 1 & 2 e) Part-Time Intervention teacher in Grades 3-5 2018-19 CEP 29  Mathematics Upon meeting with the Pupil Personnel Team and reviewing the student’s response to Tier I intervention a student may qualify for academic intervention. Student work/documentation is reviewed to determine the targeted intervention service. Science Upon meeting with the Pupil Personnel Team and reviewing the student’s response to Tier I intervention a student may qualify for academic intervention. Student In-direct services are provided to support teachers and the PPT team to determine appropriate services and continuation of support as well conduct a “child study” model. Differentiated instruction in all classes – Tier I Includes: a. Repeated exposure to practice skills b. Pre-teaching concepts c. Guided Math/Strategy Lessons d. Conferences e. Modified materials Tier II intervention: a. At-risk instruction with SETSS teacher or intervention teacher/Math Coach b. Set up on DreamboxLearning In-direct support with staff developer and teacher to create modified materials Differentiated instruction in all classes – Tier I Includes: a. Small group School Day b. Small group c. Small group d. One to one e. Small groups a. Small group b. One to One a. Small group School Day b. One to one c. Small group a. Repeated exposure to practice skills 2018-19 CEP 30 b. Conferences c. Modified materials Differentiated instruction in all classes – Tier I Includes: a. Pre-teaching content a) Small group School Day b) Small group c) Small group d) One to one b. Presenting information through different learning styles e) Small group/Individual c. Guided Reading/Strategy Lessons d. Conferences e. Modified materials Cycle of sessions with guidance counselor Group and one to one School Day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) work/documentation is reviewed to determine the targeted intervention service. Upon meeting with the Pupil Personnel Team and reviewing the student’s response to Tier I intervention a student may qualify for academic intervention. Student work/documentation is reviewed to determine the targeted intervention service. Upon meeting with the Pupil Personnel Team and reviewing the student’s response to Tier I intervention a student may qualify for academic intervention. Student work/documentation is reviewed to determine the targeted intervention service. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32 OTPS supplies and before/after school programs, as needed 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 183, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 183 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 183, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: a. RATIONALE: The results of the 2018 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL show we have 36 ELLs from grades K-5 with levels from entering-expanding. When examining running records of the ELLs in our school the following trends were seen. 1. Many ELLs had miscues in word endings. 2. Many ELLs lacked comprehension of tier 2 words in grade level texts. There is a need for supplemental word study and vocabulary instruction for the ELLs in our school. In this program ELLs will meet for twice a week, for 1.5 hours, in a small group setting that will focus on providing them with an additional literacy block in the school day. The focus of these sessions will be on Word Study and vocabulary instruction through speaking activities and guided reading. b. SUBGROUPS AND GRADE LEVELS TO BE SERVED: There will be four groups. Current ELLs in grades K, 1, 2-3, and 4-5. Groups will be heterogeneous with proficiency levels ranging from entering to expanding. The groups will take place during two sessions during the school year. The ENL teacher will rotate between subgroups. c. SCHEDULE AND DURATION: Two days a week on Wednesday and Thursday, Friday after school for 1.5hr. sessions. 2:45 - 4:15 pm. K and 1 dates are January 9th, 10th, 11th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 30th, 31st. 2-3 and 4-5 dates are February 1st, 6th, 7th, 8th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 26th, 27th, 28th, March 1st, March 6th, March 7th. d. LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION: The language of instruction for the supplemental direct instruction after school will be English. e. NUMBER AND TYPES OF CERTIFIED TEACHERS: During the after-school supplemental program there will be 5 certified teachers (one certified ENL teacher and four certified General Education teacher.) f. TYPES OF MATERIALS: Instructors will use the Fountas and Pinnel Leveled Library Kits which offer authentic classroom texts that match current reading levels of students and support guided reading instruction and phonemic awareness/word study development. The texts, which cover a variety of science and social studies topics, will be used to teach content area vocabulary and support the content area units of study students are learning in their classrooms. These materials are already in the school and do not need to be purchased. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: a. RATIONALE: Since all ELLs remain with their mainstream classes most of the day, general classroom teachers deliver most of their content instruction, so it's very important for these teachers to have time to get support in differentiation, in understanding the students' family 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development cultures, and in awareness of each student's language acquisition progress. It's also important for the ENL teacher to take advantage of professional development beyond the school. b. TEACHERS TO RECEIVE TRAINING: Therefore, all classroom teachers shall have professional development opportunities through our literacy and math coach, as well as outside consultants, that address ELL students and their needs. c. SCHEDULE AND DURATION: Time has been scheduled from 2:45 till 4pm on Mondays, during which time teachers work together in inquiry teams, reading professional texts and doing similar collaborative professional improvement activities such as child study, materials making, and unit planning. The full-time ENL teacher Rachel Curland attend monthly meetings with TESOL colleagues in other districts. These meetings are held on the third Wednesday of every month, from 6pm till 8:30pm. The evening meetings are not using Title III money, but is funded by other sources. In addition, the ENL teacher attends MFSC ELL lead workshops and Teacher College Reading and Writing Project workshops that support ENL students in the literacy classroom. Our ENL teacher is a member of our school's professional development committee, which meets monthly with colleagues and administration to plan quality professional development and cycles of study. The ENL teacher's role is to ensure ENL professional development is embedded in topics studied. The professional development for the staff development for the staff involved in providing direct instruction will cover the Word Study K-2 and Grammar Instruction 3-5 on the following dates: October 12th, 22nd, 29th, November 19th, 26th, December 3rd, 10th, 17th, January 7th, 28th, February 4th, 11th, 25th, March 25th, April 1st. d. TOPICS TO BE COVERED: This year, our school wide focus is on building a consistent K-5 word study program that will develop phonemic awareness and grammar/usage skills in our students. Grade team meetings focus on looking at 5 students across the year and their progress on our writing, On-Demand assessments. Focus groups will be Students with Disabilities, ENL students, struggling writers, and high performing writers. Discussing strategies for supporting students will be discussed and shared. e. NAME OF PROVIDER: The lead provider for the local school PD will be both the full-time ENL teacher Rachel Curland, Teachers College Reading and Writing consultants, and workshops provided by the Manhattan Field Support Center. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: a. RATIONALE: Most of our ELL parent population generally has attained a high level of English fluency in only reading and writing, before their arrival; however, many are uncomfortable speaking and they have particular difficulty understanding authentic casual conversation. These parents are eager for opportunities to improve their oracy, especially stay-at-home parents whose spouses are working, but also including some already in the work force who only use the native language in their jobs. A monthly parent class held in the ENL room focuses on oracy skills. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities b. SCHEDULE AND DURATION: Class meets 3:00-4:00pm on September 21st, October 3rd, October 17th, November 8th, December 6th, December 19th, January 3rd, March 8th, March 13th, April 10th, April 11th, May 1st, May 8th June 12th, c. TOPICS TO BE COVERED: Getting Acquainted, Learning how to use the NYPL as a resource for you and your child, Using the Public Library to find Just Right Books, New Year's Across Cultures, Games for improving literacy for you and your child, Parents Favorite Books from Childhood, Holidays Here and Abroad, Plants and Poetry, Celebrating International Day, Initiating Family Social Activities with Children's Classmates, and Flag Day Art Celebration, Summer Reading. e. HOW PARENTS WILL BE NOTIFIED: All ELL parents in our community have email, and reminders of the upcoming parent class is emailed and backpacked, along with the focus topic and attachments of handouts for advance study. Other family members and parents' co-workers sometimes join the class as well, and are always welcomed. Sign-in sheets and agendas in the ENL room. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9,894  Per session  Per diem x $2472 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1. (Per-Session x5 teachers) 36 Hours of after school supplemental Title 3 direct instruction. 5 teachers x 36 hrs =$9,180. 2. (Per-Session x 1 teacher) Sessions for parental involvement. 1 teacher x 14 hrs= $714. *per-session calculated at $51 per hr. N/A $2472-Classroom Library Books Remaining funds will be used to continue our year long goal of filling classroom libraries with books that reflect the diversity of our students and families via a variety of reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A NA Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A 12366. 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Robert Louis Stevenson Borough Manhattan School Number 183 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Martin Woodard Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rachel Curland Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Kim Banks Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator LuAnn Propper Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 550 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.73%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments used to guide instructional planning are: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers are trained in how to administer and use these assessments to inform classroom instruction. Teachers meet monthly in grade team meetings to discuss student progress. We have a math coach on staff who delivers academic intervention to those students, especially ELLs who need additional classroom support. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher meet periodically to discuss the results of formative assessments and identify student areas of strengths and areas that need support and use the data to inform instruction. For example, if running record reveals a student is able to decode 96-100% of the text but is not yet able to answer comprehension questions accurately the ENL teacher and classroom teacher will decide that a goal for the student is to increase their reading comprehension for a text at their instructional reading level. Then, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher will work together to create supports for the student. The ENL teacher 2018-19 CEP 50  supports will focus on language and vocabulary development needed for comprehension and the classroom teachers supports will include strategies such as story maps and graphic organizers. After instruction that targets the areas that need support has been given for the amount of time determined by the teachers, the student will be assessed again to see if the instruction has been effective in reaching their goal. If the student has not met their goal, instruction towards that goal will continue and if they have met their goal the ENL teacher and classroom teachers will create a new goal and necessary supports. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessments such as the NYSESLAT are reviewed at the beginning of the year and provide our teachers and school leadership with detailed information about our students’ strengths and areas that need support in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. By looking at individual student data, we are able to determine groupings of students and necessary small group instruction that will target areas that need support. Assessments such as MOSL provide classroom teachers with data on current reading level and information about their reading accuracy and comprehension. This data is used to form guided reading groups and strategy groups that target areas that need support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using both formative and summative assessments, as well as notes and observations, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher can determine if ELLs are making sufficient progress or if additional language supports are needed. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher will identify the specific areas where students need additional support and then adapt instruction to address the students needs. If the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher agree there is need for further intervention is needed they will consult with the RTI team who will provide the teachers with activities and supports, and possibly outside specialist support for tier 1 in-class interventions for a six week period. After the six-week period, the RTI team will determine if the student has made progress in the areas identified as needing support, or if further intervention is needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcomes assessments and data are used to inform out ELL program: a. NYSESLAT b. ELA c. Math d. EDAT 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Information is shared with our professional development committee, staff during whole-school professional development, and month grade team meetings. Through analyzing the data, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher can create goals for students and plan instruction to meet these goals. The data also helps the ENL teacher and classroom teacher to create purposeful groupings of students based on their strengths and areas that need support. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 51  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. A. Instruction in the freestanding ENL program is delivered through both integrated ENL and standalone ENL. In integrated ENL, the classroom teacher and ENL teacher co-teach and students receive core content from the classroom teacher and language instruction from the ENL teacher simultaneously in their mainstream classrooms. In standalone ENL, the ENL teacher delivers instruction to small groups of ELLs of heterogeneous skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not have a TBE program at this time c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a DL program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and emergent level students receive a minimum of 360 minutes per week (2 units) the ENL teacher. This includes instruction in math language and math skills, as well as the language arts skills of speaking, listening, reading and writing. Transitioning and expanding level students receive more reading- and vocabulary-intense instruction, and they receive an additional minimum of in-class ELA literacy instruction delivered by common branches certified teachers, for one unit (180 minutes) weekly. Students considered proficient, or commanding, on the basis of past NYSESLAT performance continue for two years to receive service in the amount of half a unit weekly (90 minutes). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Both stand-alone and intergrated ENL classes are taught in English. The ENL teacher works closely with classroom teachers, the science teacher, literacy coach, and math coach to plan instruction for ELLs that includes both language and content objectives. In collaboration with content area teachers and coaches, the ENL teacher identifies language that would pose barriers for ELLs in understanding the content and language objectives are planned accordingly. In addition, captions are used to accompany content-area videos, and students use bilingual dictionaries. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As free-standing ENL is the only program offered at our school, instruction and assessment is delivered in English. However, if a standardized assessment is available in the student’s native language, the assessment is given as an option for the student. As many of our ELLs speak low-incidence languages where that option is not available parent conferences are key in gaining insight into an ELLs progress in their home language. In addition, teachers, paraprofessionals, student teachers, and other school staff interact with ELLs through informal exchanges and give insight on a student’s home language abilities throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 52  A. P.S. 183 has no SIFE students and no SIFE program is used. If a SIFE student were to register the student would be age-appropriately placed in a classroom. Then that student would be served individually based on their needs, using relevant scaffolding techniques and literacy intervention. B. All our current ELLs are categorized as newcomers. Standalone ENL lessons usually begin with highly contextualized story or informational text, with visuals to support the content. Follow up lessons focus on vocabulary development, progressing (or differentiated for more fluent students) to phrase and sentence work, and finally with full discourse lessons with extended writing pieces. C. P.S. 183 has no developing ELLs. However, if we did have a student who was a developing ELL their program would be created based upon an analysis of their NYSESLAT and ELA scores to find areas that need additional support and subsequently, instruction would be planned to target those areas of need. D. At P.S. 183 there are no long term ELLs and therefore no program in place for long term ELLs. However, if we did have a student who was a long term ELL, their program would be created based upon an analysis of their NYSESLAT scores to find areas of weakness and plan instruction accordingly. For example if a student were to get low scores in a single modality such as writing, they would be placed in a writing intensive ENL class. E.Former ELL students who exit their ELL status according to previous two springs testing receive 90 minutes of additional support from the ENL teacher based on their academic needs in an integrated setting. The ENL teacher has an ongoing dialogue with the classroom teacher of former ELLs throughout the year to monitor progress. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials used with ELL-SWD's provide access to academic content areas and also accelerate English language development. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher and other specialists providing the child services to ensure that appropriate and relevant context-related texts are used in the classroom. For example, if the mainstream class is doing a unit on the American Revolution, the ENL teacher might find corresponding texts, but in a clearer, simpler way, more contextualized. By incorporating simpler texts, extensively supported by visual information and graphics, the ENL teacher would scaffold content so the students comprehend what the classroom peers are using, but on a more understandable level (as per Krashen's I+1, instead of the classroom's I+5). The school owns a subscription to Rosetta Stone, which supports newcomer ELLs in the general classroom until a beginning modicum of English competency is acquired. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of the ELL-SWD's within the least restrictive environment. Students are grouped by both grade/age level and by comprehension levels. An entering or emerging ELLs (mandated for two units) will be grouped with similarly mandated students, roughly matching fluency levels. Transitioning and expanding students (mandated for a single unit) would either receive intergrated instruction, or if grouped would be served at grade level. Lessons are differentiated so more advanced or older students are challenged appropriately. Curricular and instructional flexibility is dependent upon the fluency levels of the students in each group. With lower levels, the focus is mainly on getting the appropriate context-related vocabulary. If fluency levels are intermediate or advanced, the focus shifts to understanding grade level vocabulary and grade level context of the unit (CALP). More focus is on grammar and a writing intensive element. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELL students are continually assessed to examine the effectiveness of the instruction and the intervention program for all content areas. Additional at-risk intervention is available for those who qualify. There are targeted intervention programs available for ELLs who need the assistance in math, social studies, science and ELA prep. Intervention teachers evaluate and assess what each ELL student may need for the year and, depending on scores, the interventionists work with students who may benefit from additional support outside of the ENL class and the general classroom. Various curricula are begun and 2018-19 CEP 53  monthly assessment is provided for each student who has intervention services. Assessment tools include running records, reading levels, anecdotals and conference notes. Additionally, the content area standardized tests are used. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the regulations in CR Part 154, the integrated ENL model will become a bigger part of the ENL program. This will require even more collaboration among the classroom and ENL teachers to ensure the integrated ENL program is a success and a meaningful learning opportunity for the ELL population. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs have been discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Companies and organizations providing extracurricular and curricular programs include National Dance Institute, Wingspan, Yorkville Youth Athletic Association, Chess NYC, Vision Education Media, Spanish Ibero Institute, Roll America, and Simply Sports, to name a few. Afterschool programs provide instruction in chess, drama, Spanish, and art, as well as various sports. At the beginning of the school year, tables are set up with information on the various programs, flyers are sent home in backpack mail, and information is available on the school website. This information is available in the parents' preferred languages. The parent coordinator is readily available, with her office space near the building’s front entrance, to answer ELL parents’ questions about the programs available and to seek translation assistance if needed. Groups are small, so that ELLs participating in their activity of choice receive plenty of individual attention and help from the coaches and teachers. The Club Wingspan afterschool model, for example, is tailored specifically to our diverse school community. Site Directors and assistants facilitate daily program management, and talented teaching artists, all having acquired security clearance, focus on instructing the medium they do best. All students have equal opportunity to broaden their learning, and classes such as Rock Band, Karate, Mini Musical, Pop Art, and inline skating are favorites of ELLs. Any ELLs whose families are unable to pay for these contracted afterschool programs may apply for assistance through the school parent coordinator. All these programs are conducted in the school building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A. Classroom teachers use laptops and ipads to access Google Translate to provide support for students reading, writing, and speaking. B. Students are taught to use bilingual dictionaries purchased in each language by the school. This both supports L1 maintenance, and encourages the students to use available technology to bridge to the time their L2 comprehension has improved. C. Incoming beginning and intermediate speakers to our school are given the Rosetta Stone program on laptops to work on independently in their classroom. D. Younger ELLs are given in-school tutorials of free English language websites such as starfall.com and britishcouncil.org/kids. E. Our younger k/1 ENL students participate in a computer program lending library in which they may borrow an educational computer program for a two-week period (e.g., Reader Rabbit, Math Blaster, etc.). Our school has a subscription to an online Discovery website, unitedstreaming.org. All parents of ENL students receive a user name and password giving them access to an online library with over 9000 content-related video clips. F. Content during ENL instruction varies from folk stories, geography, games, songs, readers’ theater, science, etc. Materials for instruction range from picture books, books on tape, jazz chants, bilingual dictionaries (both electronic and hard-copy), games, puzzles, manipulatives such as reading rods, cuisinaire rods, and base-ten blocks, and teacher-made activities follow-up materials. G. BrainPop and BrainPop Jr. are used as a resource to teach content in general classroom and ENL instruction. Closed captions are used to provide additional avenues of access to the content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 54  A. DL-We do not have a dual language program at this time. B. TBE-We do not have a TBE program at this time. C. ENL-Students are routinely given projects to do together with a parent or older sibling in the home language. This serves to communicate that maintenance of home language skills is valued, to draw in and involve family members in the substance of in-school ENL classwork, and to sustain and enhance native language literacy skills. In order to maintain native language skills (especially important for students planning to re-enter home country schools), students prepare bilingual vocabulary lists for stories read in class, which in turn are invaluable to subsequent groups working with the same story. When first language literacy skills were not in place before arrival, working with family members is satisfying for all parties. Those students with sufficient literacy skills use bilingual dictionaries both electronic and hard copy. Students are encouraged to read for pleasure both in English and in the home language, and many attend Saturday schools. When new vocabulary is encountered in class, a natural opportunity for a comparative etymology arises in a group that might be comprised of speakers of eight different languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are grouped by grade level in groups that include both beginner levels and advanced. However groups of literate newcomers are given additional time in groups of two contiguous grade levels for second + third, and fourth + fifth; first grade beginners are taught only on grade level. Resources for all ENL groups are chosen with individual students in mind. Materials appropriate for beginning first graders in fall of 2017, for example, whose oral skills surpassed their literacy skills, would not be appropriate for this year's first graders, whose oral is still limited. One of the challenging aspects of delivering ENL instruction across six grade levels is to tailor it according to the developmental level of the array of students served, including what is typical of each age and grade, as well as that of students identified as having atypical cognitive needs. Continuous informal assessment throughout the term quickly reveals any mismatch between materials and methodology being used and the needs of any ELL student. Using these assessments assures that required services and resources do indeed correspond to appropriate ages and grades. ELL-SWDs at our school are all mainstreamed in the least restrictive environment deemed best for the individual and prescribed in their IEPs. Services and resources are adapted for these two children to correspond to their ages and grades while specifically being geared to address their individual cognitive needs. During push-in for example, the ESL teacher may sit nearer one of these children and explain clearly one step at a time, and demonstrate material organization, prompting to keep the child on-task and modifying worktime with frequent breaks and praise. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do no co-locate with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Since school terms vary across the globe and since most of our families' calendars are dictated by their parents' new positions in New York City, it is not unusual for families to enter at other times of the year. When these newcomers first arrive, they are quickly introduced to other families who speak their languages, and the very day they register they meet the ENL teacher as well as the Parent Coordinator. They fill out the papers while sitting facing the school's language board, listing each of the nearly 50 languages spoken in the school and the names of children and staff who speak each of them. This board is updated monthly, so in a short time the new entrants' names are also posted there for the next regsitering family to note. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives within the school day. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 55 We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers receive on a regular basis an email newsletter from the Office of English Language Learners (OELL) listing professional development opportunities in the region. The state professional organization, NYS TESOL, has an annual conference with nationally renowned keynote speakers and concurrent session presenters. Additionally the global organization, TESOL, is attended in March whenever held in the eastern United States. This information is in turn always reported to common branches teachers of ELLs, as well as to administrators such as the principal and assistant principal, to the guidance counselor and school-based support team, and to office staff such as the secretary and clerks and assistants—all to ensure that the necessary steps are taken to follow new compliance regulations and best practice as shown by new research in the field of applied linguistics. All teachers at the school have been given hard copies of the CCSS, and links to them are readily available as well. PD sessions help support teachers in delivering Common Core-aligned instruction, with modifications and accommodations to make the standards more accessible to their ELL students. Staff development is highly valued by all teachers of ELLs at our school, who care deeply about their students' progress and academic achievement, as well as linguistic acquisition. Activities include turn-and-talk, picture walks, workshop model, and role play. The ENL teacher and any other teacher who would like to participate, take advantage of opportunities such as NYS TESOL conferences, small ELL study groups offered within the network and other related workshops. The ENL teacher stays abreast of successful techniques and assessments. Throughout the year, the ENL teacher attends workshops focused both on instructional techniques and on updated regulations. The ENL teacher and invited colleagues meet one evening every month during the school year for professional peer consultation regarding requisite red tape (ATS, LAP, STARS, etc.), student and family issues, and good teaching practice. Reports about workshops and conventions attended are shared at these monthly dinner meetings, the dates of which are set at each preceeding meeting. The ENL teacher attends ELL related Teacher's College Workshops for example, the mini-institute: Adapting Units of Study for English Language Learner. The ENL teacher attends various PLOs (Professional Learning Opportunities) offered by the Manhattan Field Support Center for example ELL Jumpstart (August 2017), Manhattan Field Support Expo (June 2017), Manhattan Field Support Workshop for ELL leads (September 2016-June 2017) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher offers eight 50 minute sessions of professional development training to the school staff once a month during the Monday afternoon inquiry periods provided by the school administration. Topics include Second Language Acquisition Continuum (in 2 parts), Vocabulary Development, Cultural Differences and Teaching and Learning, Scaffolding Techniques in Content Areas (2 parts), Your ELLs and Assessment, Interpreting Data. Activities during these sessions include turn-and-talk, and Q-and-A Quicktalk.This period is supplemented by sessions during the two Chancellors Days in November and June, and on 2018-19 CEP 56  Election Day in November. Agendas are reported to the principal, and rosters of attendance following each session's sign-up are kept. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? After a newcomer has been here long enough for the teachers to be familiar with the individual, parents are invited to come in for a conference. Another meeting usually occurs after the NYSESLAT, math, ELA, and science exams have completed, during June, to discuss the student's apparent performance (scores are not available until the next year), and to hear family's activities for summer and make suggestions for camp or summer school. As always at our school, translation services are engaged when the parent's language preference is other than English. Translators may be solicited from among the parent community, the staff community, NYU Teaching and Learning TESOL graduate students, or neighborhood resources. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Level of PS183 parent involvement is extremely high throughout the school, not only as concerns ELL parents. English-speaking parents help contribute to meeting ELL students needs. For example, they donate books or software their own children may have outgrown. Parents of ELLs are also highly active, participating in PTA for example, or volunteering time to help at school, such as mounting artwork in the halls, or chaperoning class trips. At the ELL Parent Orientation meeting at the beginning of the year, parents chatted and exchanged contact information so they can contact each other. All PS183 parents dedicate time, energy, books, and money to the school, and kindergarten parents send snacks. All parents, including ELL parents, come to publishing parties and class breakfasts. Parents receive notification of the above mentioned activities via backpacked letters home and the school website. These letters are translated into the preferred home language for those who requested that at registration. Lists of parent translation preferences are kept in the school office by LuAnn Propper, Parent Coordinator. She speaks face to face frequently with parents seeking clarification or other assistance, and her desk faces the main office door, always open, so she is personally visible to all who enter the main front door. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Martin Woodard, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON School DBN: 02M183 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Martin Woodard Title Principal Kim Banks Assistant Principal LuAnn Propper Parent Coordinator Rachel Curland ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/19/2017 09/19/2017 09/19/2017 09/19/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M183 School Name: P.S. 183 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rachel Curland ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, all parents are interviewed by a trained pedagogue, at which time they indicate if they need translation and interpretation assistance. This information is duly entered into ATS. The RRPL report is generated to determine that all parents are receiving the assistance they need. If there are errors, the UPPG is used to update language preference. Fewer than 1% of our school's parents request formal translation service 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 60  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Majority of Parents at PS 183 prefer all communication in English. Hebrew Spanish French English. Hebrew Spanish French 99% 0.19% 0.09% 0.09% English Hebrew Spanish French 99% 0.19% 0.09% 0.09% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English is preferred for written and oral communication. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Our school community speaks nearly 50 languages, most of them low incidence languages. Translation is provided during parent conferences during March and November, and administering student exams. Flyer's are organized in advance, however all of our families have requested information be in English as they have a speaker in their home to translate. We also would utilize that many templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other DOE notices are available in translation at the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit.. Information is distributed in English throughout the year. plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We frequently use teachers and additional staff members to support with translation services. We also at times utilize our diverse parent community to support families who need translation services at meetings. Finally, we also use the DOE 2018-19 CEP 61  N/A NA NA translation services as well as hire any outside translators during the administration of state exams. N/A NA NA N/A NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Any oral interpretation needed in Spanish or Chinese is done so by school faculty members. We have parent volunteers for many of our languages spoken by families. Any other oral language is translated using the free over the phone translation service at 718-752-7373. N/A NA NA Parent Teacher Conferences are our main face-to-face, and they occur in early November and March. Teachers have been instructed to alert our ENL teacher should translation services be required prior to the scheduled parent meeting. N/A NA NA N/A NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. As in all school emergencies, such as lock downs or evacuations, parents would need to call 311 or the Department of Education for information. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 62  Prior to parent teacher conferences, our ENL teacher will provide a brief information sheet so teachers are aware of communication services and request them ahead of time. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We provide and display the requirements indicated above. There is always assistance provided as needed to ensure families feel supported in their language needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL teacher holds weekly parent meetings in the morning, and is therefore in steady contact with those who consider themselves in need of English acquisition help. Questionnaires are collected at the beginning of the year asking about parent language needs, and then followed up later in the year. 2018-19 CEP 63 
