2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M185 School Name: THE LOCKE SCHOOL OF ARTS AND ENGINEERING Principal: JANE MURPHY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Locke School of Arts and Engineering 310300010185 Prekindergarten - 5 School Number (DBN): 03M185 20 West 112 th Street New York, NY 10026 212-534-7490 212-831-8613 Phone Number: Fax: Jane Murphy Jmurphy32@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Jane Murphy KaitlynLynch MelissaChu Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Kimberly Wilson Marshal SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Chu None None Geographical District: 03 District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street Room 122 New York, NY 10025 Superintendent’s Office Address: ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: 212-356-7567 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue 8 th Floor New York, NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 919-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jane Murphy Kaitlyn Lynch Melissa Chu Milagros Figeroa Caitlin Blanda Dr. Shannon R. Waite *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Secretary/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jenny Kulpanovich Member/ Teacher Cara Sclafani Michele Vicarro Kimberley Marshall Tyson Hall Lorelei Williams Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher/Co-Chairperson Member/ Parent/Co-Chairperson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to create and sustain an enriched learning environment that ensures each child reaches a high level of achievement, based on standards set by the city and state and the demands of 21st century learning. We commit to creating and sustaining a comprehensive system of support to assure this outcome. 2018-19 CEP 9  It is our vision that children who attend our school will learn to love learning, to understand that they have a place in the world and an important contribution to make. They will understand that all learning is a process. They will be flexible, resilient and creative thinkers, who are able to work collaboratively and solve problems. To this end, we offer curricula that value student voice and choice, making each child visible and empowered to discover their own questions, proclivities and abilities. We will support all learners in these endeavors with direct learning opportunities as well as enrichment through the arts and project-based learning to meet the needs of all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Locke School of Arts and Engineering serves approximately 350 bright and eager learners in grades Prekindergarten through 5. We are a small, progressive school with a "STEAM" focus. Students have weekly classes in yoga, dance, piano, vocal music, Orff instruments, visual arts as well as engineering and robotics in our LEGO Lab. All students at our school engage in project-based learning. Projects facilitate the integration and application of reading, writing and mathematics skills into rich, real world contexts based on science, engineering and social studies themes. Supportive curricula supplement projects and include KIBO Robotics, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Units, Investigations 3 Mathematics, and Cognitively Guided Instruction. The core values for the community at The Locke School are expressed and practiced through our "Four Bees", Be Kind, Be Safe, Be Helpful, and Be Ready. A fifth bee, "Bee Present" holds our expectations for how our students learn to engage in the world , including the development of persistence, wonder and awe, and learning through the five senses. Progress and challenges in the development of these values of are celebrated at monthly school-wide Bee Rallies. Our commitment to sustaining an inclusive and engaging learning environment for all children is supported by our ongoing development of Emotionally Responsive Practices through our partnership with Bank Street. On-site service providers for occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech and counseling as well as on-site family wellness services provided by Northside Center allow us to offer a continuum of services for children with a range of abilities. Family engagement is an important part of each child's education at The Locke School. Parents and guardians participate in monthly events at school including Children at Work events, Principal's Chats, Healthy Living classes, and activities such as the Harvest Parade, LEGO Week, our annual Dad's Make a Difference Rally and quarterly theme-based Family Fun Nights. At The Locke School, we believe that each child has a gift to offer the world, and that 'giftedness' emerges through equitable opportunities to learn in supportive environments that represent the rich diversity of human experience 2018-19 CEP 10  around us. Adults in this community seek to continually expand our understanding and knowledge of how to serve children and the community through ongoing professional learning and personal development. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are an inclusive education settings for children with a range of abilities and disabilities. We offer integrated co-teaching classrooms on every grade (PK - 5). Students with special needs receive services in school including speech and language, social/emotional counseling, behavior modification support, physical therapy and occupational therapy. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the past year, our school has experienced successes in many areas, as has our sister school with whom we are consolidating. There are many indicators for these successes, including the quantity and quality of projects completed by students, increased family engagement, and improved teacher performance ratings. As a consolidated school we are now serving PK- through 5th grade students. The consolidation brings new opportunities to extend our student-centered approach through the upper elementary grades and new and exciting potential for extending the engineering curriculum, project-based learning, and social-emotional learning. The key areas of focus this year include bringing a unified and balanced approach to literacy across the school, maximizing student voice and choice in the curriculum, and insuring students receive meaningful and timely feedback from teachers in order to revise and improve their work. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M185 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 252 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 N/A 21 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 82.1% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 30.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.08 0% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 31 30 13 91.7% 3.2% 17.9% 57.1% 2.0% 4.0% 2 0% 5.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: In the school year 2017-18 the lower school transitioned to the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curricula. Teachers and students found that the curricula supported more student voice and choice and offered more rigorous opportunities to engage in meaningful reading and writing activities. These were further supplemented with balanced literacy activities through project based learning. Principal Performance Observation: "[School leader} funds professional development for calendar days at Teachers College in reading and writing. You have strategically structured the schedules so that all grades have substantial time to meet weekly to plan curricula and look at student work. "[The school leader] and staff ensure that curricula are rigorous and aligned to the content standards across all grades and content areas." Quality Review: "Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curricula. Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding." "Checks for understanding are used in most classrooms resulting in lesson adjustments and some allowed for student self-assessment." 2018-19 CEP 13  Needs: Student Data: The lower school (K-2) has an overall grade level reading proficiency rate of roughly 70%. Of students who scored in the range of 'far below grade level' in September, many did not make sufficient progress throughout the year to be considered 'approaching' grade level. This trend continues in the upper grades, with students who are most challenged to meet the standards for grade level reading making progress but not sufficient progress to approach or meet the standards. Principal Performance Review: [The school should] ...continue to work with your teachers to strengthen their practice and ensure that all tasks and activities are purposeful, meaningful and cognitively challenge all students. In addition, teachers need to increase their systems for assessment within the class lessons to ensure that they are meeting all students’ learning needs. "Further enhance teachers’ assessment practices to ensure that ongoing checks for understanding are used to make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of students K-5 who score in the Level 1 range in the October/November reading assessment round of 2018 will score in Level 2, 3, or 4 range in May of 2019, as measured by the Fountas and Pinell Benchmarking System. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Norming for the administration of the Fountas and Pinnel Benchmarking System and other assessments will be completed school-wide by Mid-October 2018. Teachers Benchmarking dates will be established for school-wide monitoring of reading levels and skills development. Teachers Students Members of the Response to Intervention Team will be identified and will establish regular meeting times to monitor this goal. Teachers August-October 2018 August September 2018 School Administrators Administrators and Teacher Leaders October 2018 Administrators and Teacher Leaders Targeted teachers and paraprofessionals will receive initial training and ongoing support for Wilson Language based intervention programs. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September 2018 - March 2019 Families and classroom teachers will participate in the development and implementation of the plan for students identified as Level I target students, as per the F and P Benchmark and other assessments. September 2018- June 2019 Families Teachers Students Special and general education teachers and paraprofessionals School Leaders and Teacher Leaders Action plans will be created for students with progress checks every 6 weeks. At progress check points, adequate progress or lack of adequate progress will be determined and the plans will be revised as needed. Students School Leaders and Teacher Leaders Teacher observation feedback and reports will focus on how teachers are providing feedback to students Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15 October 2018- June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Adminstrators  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families directly participate in the formulation of goals and revisions for students who are in this target group. In addition, Families will be invited to review work samples every six weeks from 8:20 - 9:10am. Families will be invited to participate in monthly "Principal's chats" in which school leader will review expectations for curricular areas, explain our pedagogical approaches, provide work exemplars and conduct guided classroom visits. Translations will be provided for notices and during the events for Spanish speaking families. Other translations provided as necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● School administrators and teacher leaders will provide ongoing learning support to support teacher learning. ●Teachers will be provided with resources including published texts, updated curriculum materials, and supplies to support this work. ● The school will participate in Intervention training provided by the Office of Intervention.Internet resources, both free (for example WE TEACH, GOOGLE DOCS) and those purchased by the school (for example EXEMPLARS) will be utilized, Per Diem funds for the Learning Partners Program (LPP) will be used to support job-embedded professional learning and visits to other schools to develop best practices. Per session funds provided through the LPP will be used to support teacher development of materials, for data analysis, and common planning. ● C4E Funds and Title I will be used to purchase instructional materials as appropriate. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum of 25% of students identified as Level 1 in November reading assessments will show 'adequate progress' toward their May goal of Level 2 or 3, as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnel Benchmarking Assessment System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At the conclusion of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a review of the strengths and needs of the Framework element Supportive Environment, including how our school supports and challenges students and engages them in ambitious intellectual activity. Academic "press' in our school was further developed in the past year by increasing resources for integrated projects, resulting in an increase in the quantity and quality of student created projects. Work to further develop our Emotionally Responsive Practices in the past year led to a decrease in acting out behaviors and disciplinary action in the lower school. Strengths: Principal Performance Report: "[school leader has] strategically structured the schedules so that all grades have substantial time to meet weekly to plan curricula and look at student work. Through your hiring, organizational structures and careful and intentional use of the budget, there has been growth in student outcomes and teacher practices. The School Implementation Team (SIT) and the Child Study Team look strategically at the data to ensure that they are best meeting the needs of each child and provide the teacher with interventions. The use of the behavior charts has supported the identified students in improving their behaviors and reducing incidents. School Environment Survey: 2017-18 90% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes try hard to get food grades. 89% of teachers responded that a lot oor all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate thier behavior. OORS report data: There were 37 total incidents in the school reported in the OORS system in the lower school. 30 of the incidents were from two students. Repeat incidents from these two students were unacceptably frequent, but the frequency and severity of incidents involving members of the rest of the population were significantly reduced this year. Needs: 2018-19 CEP 17  Learning Environment Survey: 75% of teachers who teachers responded that al lot or all of the students in their classes feel it is important to come to school every day. Principal Performance Review: Teachers are providing supports for the students however, further enhance the supports to ensure that they are strategic and providing additional opportunities for students to engage in productive struggle and challenging thinking. Ensure that the student work and discussions consistently reflect high-levels of students’ thinking and participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of fourth and fifth graders participating in clubs will be able to identify learning strengths, preferences and next steps for learning, as measured by in-house rubric created to assess Club Cycle Exit surveys. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A school wide diversity team will be identified and meetings scheduled for the year. Teachers September 2018 Teacher Leaders, Administrators Cycles for Clubs based on student choice will be initiated. Students Base-line, mid-year and end of year assessment for student perceptions of learning strengths, preferences and next steps for learning will be administered by classroom teachers and scored on the rubric by the Diversity Team. Teachers Students October - June Teachers 2018 October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators Teachers, Diversity Team Diversity Team and administrators will engage in ongoing professional learning and provide turn-key training to the staff. Teacher Leaders January - May 2019 Teacher Leaders Classroom teachers and guidance counselor will revise classroom plans as needed, based on feedback from the Diversity Team. Students September 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders Teachers Counselors Target teachers will receive training from Bank Street Emotionally Responsive Practices and will serve as model classrooms for colleagues. Teachers Counselors January 2018- June 2019 Diversity Team Teacher Leaders Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families of target students will be directly involved in planning interventions and developing behavior plans. In addition, families will be invited to review work samples every six weeks from 8:20 - 9:10am in school. Families will be invited to participate in monthly "Principal's chats" in which school leader will review expectations for curricular areas, including clubs and work time, explain our pedagogical approaches, including EMOTIONALLY RESPONSIVE PRACTICES, provide work exemplars, and conduct guided classroom visits. Translations will be provided for notices of these sessions and during the events for Spanish speaking families. Other translations provided as necessary. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Leaders who participate on the Diversity Team will use team meeting time on Mondays and Tuesdays to meet. The text CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE TEACHING AND THE BRAIN by Zaretta Hammond was purchased with funds for the consolidation of PS 185 with PS 208. Family Engagement time on Tuesday's will be used for outreach to families of target students. Monday Professional Learning time and off-site professional learning will be used for staff training for emotionally responsive practices and culturally responsive teaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 or by the end of the second round of clubs, 80% of students will demonstrate improved ability to identify learning strengths, preferences and next steps for learning, as measured by the in-house rubric created to assess Club Cycle Exit surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Club cycle Exit Surveys Diversity Team Meeting Notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Principal Performance Observations: "Majority of teachers are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations to strengthen their instructional capacity and increase student outcomes." School Survey: 95% of of teachers agreed that they are able to modify instructional materials to meet the development needs and learning interests of all their students. 90% of teachers responded that lot or all of the teachers at their school are actively trying to improve their teaching. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. Needs: School Survey: 75% of teacher agreed or strongly agreed that overall their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused rather than short-team and unrelated." Principal Performance Observation: "During the class visits we observed inconsistent supports and differentiation." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 21  By June 2019 all teachers will participate in a peer observation cycle resulting in an aligned approach to balanced literacy and a gradual release of responsibility model, as evidenced by an increase is average teacher proficiency in Daniels components "1e and 1a Observed" by 10% when compared to initial observations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Model teachers and host teachers will be identified for initial cycles of peer observation. Cycles for peer observation will be established collaboratively by teacher leaders and administrators. Teachers, Teacher leaders Teachers, November 2018 Administrators November 2018 Administrators, Teacher leaders teacher leaders Instructional Rounds will be scheduled and conducted to monitor progress. Teachers Observation Reports will be aligned to the cycles and monitored for progress. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November, February, April Administrators, Teacher Leaders ongoing- October - May Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to review literacy progress and work samples every six weeks from 8:20 - 9:10am in school. Families will be invited to participate in monthly "Principal's chats" in which school leader will review expectations for curricular areas, including all content areas that involve reading and writing, and explain our pedagogical approaches. Work exemplars will be provided and families will have guided classroom visits to observe literacy lessons. Translations will be provided for notices of these sessions and during the events for Spanish speaking families. Other translations provided as necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Model Teachers will have opportunities to work as an 'inquiry' team and visit other schools as part of the Learning Partners Program, which provides additional funds for per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, average teacher proficiency in 1e and 1a will improve 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher notes, Observation Cycle schedules, Teacher sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the conclusion of the 2017-2018 school year, we reviewed the strengths and needs of the Effective School Leadership Element from the Framework for Great Schools. Strengths: Learning Environment Survey: 95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal encouraged feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal participates in instructional planning. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal carefully tracks academic progress. Needs: Learning Environment Survey: 80% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her vision for their school. 70% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. Student Performance: In 2018, the school average for K-2 proficiency on the Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics was roughly 62%. Overall 2018 third grade math scores, roughly 32% of third graders achieved a 3 or 4 on the New York State Math test. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students in grades K-2 will demonstrate grade level achievement in counting, numeration, and addition/subtraction as measured by the Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics (ECAM) will be administered by classroom teachers and monitored by teacher leaders and administrators. Administrators will provide ongoing support for creating ECAM centers, provisioning for centers, and collaborative planning time for teachers. Students Teachers ECAM data will be used to group students and plan centers for targeted math instruction. Students Teachers will meet in grade teams to monitor student progress and revise plans and assignments. Teachers, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers October, February, May October 2018 -June 2018 Teachers Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to participate in monthly "Principal's chats" in which school leader will review grade level expectations for math and pedagogical strategies. Classroom visits to observe teacher practices and center activities will be included in the Chats. Translations will be provided for notices of these sessions and during the events for Spanish speaking families. Other translations provided as necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math Consultant and F status math coach, Google drive, ECAM Centers website. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 75% of students will have made adequate progress toward meeting grade level standards, as measured by teacher-team benchmarking of the Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics (ECAM). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ECAM and teacher team mid year benchmarking of ECAM Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the conclusion of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted a review of our attendance rates and outreach to families for the past year. Information was gathered using quantitative and qualitative data to determine our strengths and needs for the Framework Element Strong Family and Community Ties. Strengths: School Survey: 98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school. 96% of of parents /guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. 95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal encouraged feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. 94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. Needs: School Survey: 65% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes have to work hard to do well. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of students demonstrating reading or attendance deficits as defined by teacher teams will meet the goals of their action plans, as per review by the Response to Intervention Team and teacher grade teams. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Schedule benchmarking dates for reading. Develop action plans for students who are reading below grade level with goals and check-in dates. Students K-5 and families Schedule benchmarking dates for attendance. Develop action plans for students with irregular attendance and/or less than 90% attendance from previous year or marking period. Students K-2 and families Schedule data meetings monthly with teacher teams to monitor data and responses to data for all subgroups Teacher teams Schedule check-in dates for action plans with families at 6-8 week intervals. Schedule support meetings focused on homework help, monitoring progress and meeting goals of an action plan with parent coordinator Partner with Northside Center to support families in need of mental health support- individual and family counseling as related to acadmic and social needs of students. Invite families to scheduled celebrations during monthly Bee Rallies (attendance, academic achievement, core values demonstrations) Families students Families Sub groups of students Students K-2 and families November 2018- June 2019 October 2018 - June 2019 November 2018- June 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 November 2018 - June 2019 November 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders Attendance Team Grade Teams, Response to Intervention Team, School Implementation Team Classroom Teachers Parent Coordinator Teachers, Northside Director, Guidance Counselor, Families School leader, teacher leaders, enrichment teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Northside Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator, Northside Center Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 80% of students with action plans will have met their action plan goals . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Goals on action plans reviewed in quarterly data meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who fall below anticipated benchmark as per the F and P Benchmark levels Mathematics Science Students who do not demonstrate mastery of day to day assignments and/or who score below proficiency cuts on ECAMand other diagnosticassessments and chapter tests and quizzes Content knowledge and skills acquisition are assessed through daily work and special tasks. Students who demonstrate delays on these measures will be identified for intervention services. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier I is provided in the classroom by the classroom teacher using Tier I curricular materials from the reading and phonics program. Tier II and III interventions involve use of parallel curricular materials specifically for intervention. Guided math periods are built into the schedule to target Tier I and II interventions. These are weekly one hour Intensive small groups thatfocus on modified assignments to close the achievementgap. Tier I and II services are provided in small group instruction and in reading and writing periods with a focus on science content. Tier I - small group 4-12 students During the school day Tier II 1-6 students in a small group Tier III1-3 students in a small group Tier II and III services delivered by special education teachers All services are provided in the classroom by the teacher in small group or 1:1. During the school day During the school day All services are provided in the classroom by the teacher in small group or 1:1. 2018-19 CEP 32 Tier I and II services are provided in small group instruction and in reading and writing periods with a focus on social studies content. All services are provided in the classroom by the teacher in small group or 1:1. During the school day Push-in or Pull out support Small group or 1:1 During the school day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Content knowledge and skills acquisition are assessed through daily work and special tasks. Students who demonstrate delays on these measures will be identified for intervention services. At risk services for social / emotional support are provided by the guidance counselor, NorthsideCounselors and school psychologist as per teacher anecdotal information and incident reports. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2 (two) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Family Support outreach from the Parent Coordinator. Teachers assist by identifying students and families who may be experiencing struggles at home. We provide uniforms, back packs, and basic school supplies. Parent Coordinator conducts special classes including those focused on nutrition, managing stress and parenting skills. We additionally incorporate emotionally responsive practices into the curriculum, including the Teddy Bear Curriculum designed by Lesley Koplow of Bank Street College. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Title 1 School 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  Title 1 school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title 1 School 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To insure that we retain and continue to attract highly qualified professionals we provide all staff robust in-service professional learning experiences. This is supported by in-house and external staff development. Teachers also have opportunities to develop leadership skills by participating on committees, leading a grade team or other teacher-led team and planning school-wide parent outreach initiatives. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We use the Danielson Rubric to define effective practice and are using it to identify professional development needs of teachers. Teachers receive formative and summative feedback on the rubric with specific next steps and commendations. The school works with outside consultants to insure teachers are engaged in the highest quality professional learning in reading, writing, math and engineering. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are not a TA program 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are not a TA program. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-Kindergarten teachers participate with the staff in many professional learning experiences, including as peer observers for instructional rounds in K- 5 and in school wide data reviews. Themes and units of study frequently progress through the grades at our school, building upon the learning of the previous grade. This is accomplished through peer led unit reviews and through PK- 5 grade team leader meetings in which curricula is mapped and developed. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers review a variety of assessment tools offered as part of curricular materials or benchmarking and identify those that are most pertinent for their grade and students. For instance, four reading benchmarking assessments are completed each year. Teachers select the 4-6 sub-tests (out of more than 20 available) that will provide the most meaningful information for their students. Teachers participate in data meetings with school leaders as a method of professional development, in which subgroups are identified and patterns and trends for individual students, subgroups, the class and grade are determined. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 220, 906 65, 184 0 X X X 2018-19 CEP 37 Column B Section Reference(s) a,b,c,d,e a,b, c, d,e 000  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 2, 192,426 X X 000 a,b,c,d,e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 38   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Locke School of Arts and Engineering , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. The Locke School of Arts and Engineering will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The Locke School’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Standards and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● parents participating in classroom involvement activities called Children –At- Work every 6 weeks. These are 50 minute periods held at the beginning of the school day in which parents and families review work collections of students and help to reflect on progress and next steps. ● Providing opportunities for parents to participate in our monthly Principal’s Chat to help them understand the educational accountability grade- level curriculum, assessment expectations and student proficiency levels. ● facilitating parent trainings on supporting good reading habits at home and adult literacy by parent coordinator. ● providing individual progress data to parents four times during the year through quarterly progress reports. ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and goals. ● distributing Parent Hand Book at Open School Night in September informing parents about school hours, important dates and programs. ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Locke School of Arts and Engineering , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School(ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Early Childhood Discovery and Design Mag Borough Manhattan School Number 185 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jane Murphy Coach Donna Kim ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Donna Kim Teacher/Subject Area Catherine Morgan Teacher/Subject Area none Related-Service Provider none Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal none Coach none School Counselor Carrie Dorfman Parent Melissa Chu Parent Coordinator Monika Vargas Field Support Center Staff Member none Other (Name and Title) none C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 185 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.27%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Qualitative and Quantitative data used to guide instructional planning for ELLs include benchmark assessments (Fauntas and Pinnell battery of reading assessments and mathematics unit tests) and as well as diagnostic assessments (including The Early Childhood Assessment of Mathematics (ECAM), frequent informal reading running records and rubric-based assessments). These assessments provide information about the current levels of performance and indications of growth. Assessments are administered according to a calendar that paces instruction and aligned assessments at key points to allow for remediation and enrichment. Formative assessments such as unit quizzes, performance tasks, checklists, and running records help us to set and maintain progress toward established goals and communicate progress with all stakeholders. We analyze students' data in teacher teams using an inquiry approach to help us identify the literacy, math and general language development of our students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 48  Teachers plan for and use common assessments and regularly meet to look at student work during scheduled professional learning time and common preparation times. The ESL teacher participates in teacher team meetings and helps to plan accommodations for daily and unit plans. The assessment calendar is established a the beginning of the school year and paced to track progress in order to provide timely intervention, enrichment and remediation as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ECDD evaluates the success of the ELL program by monitoring the progress that the ELL students make each year. The NYSESLAT offers insight on how they are progressing in each of the 4 modalities. The RLAT is particularly helpful as it includes scores from the past 3 years. This helps us see whether or not there has been continued progress. The raw scores help us see if the students are making steady progress or if there is a de;ay or discrepancy in one or more of the language modalities. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to design lessons and teach learning strategies for students who require additional support in any of the language modalities. For example, a student that demonstrates a need for further support in 'listening' will receive additional coaching and opportunities to develop skills in that modality. Classroom teachers are provided with models for best practice and professional learning opportunities to help students build on comprehensible input. An example of this type of teacher learning includes how to design and use scaffolds to increase comprehensible input in the various modalities. Assessment tools used by the school include Fauntas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System and performance tasks from ECAM, Exemplars, TCRWP (for writing) and in-house assessments for interdisciplinary project based learning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data is monitored by a team of teachers who meet monthly as part of the Response to Intervention framework initiative. Teachers have planning time with the ENL teacher/coach. Interventions are planned in team meetings that include the ESL teacher. Monthly RTI team meetings include review of achievement data for ELLs. Outcomes from these meetings are disseminated by the ESL teacher at grade team meetings, where interventions and enrichment are planned for ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use a variety of assessments in order to group all students, including ELL students based on individual needs. Data is analyzed collaboratively by teachers teams and reviewed by classroom teachers and service providers. Next steps are determined based on current performance levels. Intervention and enrichment is provided in a number of formats as supported by our Tier 1, 2 and 3 intervention model. Students who demonstrated continued struggles to demonstrate progress are provided with increasingly intensive supports, including special materials, increasing frequency, and intervention groups as small as 1-3 per teacher. Revisions to the intervention plans are made as new data is collected and analyzed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the 2014-2015 NYSESLAT reveals that our students traditionally do well in the speaking and listening portion of the NYSESLAT and that the weakest modality is writing. Writing is a focus for the ELL population for the 2015-2016 school year. Students who remain at the Intermediate level on the NYSESLAT tend to be at that level because of deficits in the Reading and/or Writing modalities. The data shows that students tend to reach proficiency in Speaking and Listening first. We use the data from the NYSESLAT to focus ESL instruction in order for the ELL students to achieve grade-level proficiency in all language modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings are shared with teachers at data meeting and during common planning times. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 49  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational model of ECDD ENL program is designed to meet the needs of all students. The ENL teacher pulls out groups of entering (beginner) and emerging (low-intermediate) students to deliver ENL lessons driven by students' areas of greatest needs and aligned to the grade level curriculum. The ENL teacher uses the NYSESLAT scores as a guide, but also uses his own assessments and observations in order to group the students appropriately. During these periods the ENL teacher focuses on vocabulary development, language skills and literacy strategies designed to help students quickly reach proficiency in the four modalities. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students receive integrated service in their classroom for the mandated amount of time. In their classrooms, ENL students are grouped by proficiency in order for the ENL teacher to offer focused reading/writing instruction to those students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? A comprehensive schedule is developed in the beginning of the school year with the mandated minutes of instruction required by the ELL population. All service providers in the school, including the ENL teacher, create a schedule that meets the needs of the students with the least amount of disruption of the student’s program. Entering and Emerging level students receive ESL instruction (360 min/wk). 180 minutes are delivered in a Stand Alone setting and 180 minutes are integrated. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and Commanding students also receive at least 90 minutes of integrated ENL for 2 years after reaching that level. Student attendance is taken and monitored by the ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Within the integrated program, core content is delivered side-by-side by a common branch/early childhood teacher and an ENL teacher. This instruction is delivered in English to all students with supports for ELL students such as word banks, vocabulary lists, picture support, and specific strategy lessons delivered by the ENL teacher. The common branch and ENL ensure that each lesson is aligned to the CCLS and grade level curriculum. Other instructional techniques are learned and refined in workshops with the borough. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since ELLs in the ENL program do not receive native language instruction we do not evaluate their native language throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 50  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction for ELL subgroups a. There are no SIFE students at our school. We are Pre-k to 2nd grade school. b. Newcomer ELLs (0-3 years of service) are generally in the Beginner or Intermediate group that meets 8 times a week for focused ENL instruction. Their lessons focus on vocabulary building, phonemic awareness, and turning oral language skills into written language skills. c. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are served as per their mandated minutes prescribed by the NYSESLAT and state requirements. Their progress is monitored to ensure that they are progressing as expected in all 4 modalities. If there is evidence of lagging behind on their RNMR and/or RLAT printouts those areas are addressed by the ESL teacher in one-to-one conferences. Individualized and differentiated instruction is provided as needed. d. There are no Long terms ELLs in the school. We are Pre-K–Second grade school. e. Former ELLs continue to receive support through integrated ENL classes 90 minutes a week for 2 years after reaching proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students with special needs are given the support they require according to their IEPs along with the ELL instruction based on their proficiency level. The ENL teacher is present at all of these students’ IEP meetings in order to assist and and make recommendations with the team. This instruction includes word banks, vocabulary lists, picture support, and specific strategy lessons delivered by the ENL and Special Education teacher. Other instructional techniques are learned and refined in workshops with the borough. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive all required ENL minutes and additional services in the least restrictive environment our service providers all meet at the beginning of the school year with copies of the students’ IEPs to discuss the scheduling of students who receive multiple services. This way we can ensure that there is no overlap in scheduling and that students are served in the least restrictive environment. The curriculum and instruction in all classes is informed by student IEPs, as all teachers have access to the IEPs through SESIS or on paper. Assessments throughout the year are given with appropriate testing modification 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are using Benchmark assessment to identify students needing targeting intervention programs. This program is currently offered in English and Spanish, as needed. Using the results of this assessment we group students into tier I, tier II, or tier III intervention services. These services are provided in English. In mathematics, the Investigations III curriculum provides teachers with tier I, tier II, tier III, and specific ELL strategies in each lesson throughout the unit. For ELLS, word problems is the greatest area of need in mathematics and we support ELLs by having students talk about the problems, create mental images of the problem, and model their thinking with manipulatives. We use an approach called "Cognitively Guided Instruction" to develop language and thinking for language-based math problems. We additionally provide a period each week for 'guided math', which is based on the current performance levels of base-line skills. Social Studies and Science curriculum are addressed through multidisciplinary project based units of study that are rich in meaningful and relevant contexts. Teachers design units of study to include trips, family involvement and real-life application of what students are learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, based on the recommendations from CR-154, we will be servicing students with the integrated model. This is an improvement on last year's pull-out model as students will have less interruption from their regular schedule. Also, 2018-19 CEP 51  the ENL supports will be delivered within the class specific curriculum. in the coming year we are including a daily 'work time' period in which students exercise choice and work collaboratively on projects that support developmental and academic growth. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued. We have decreased our stand alone sessions and those will only be provided to students that are classified as Entering and Emerging. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. instruments ELLs are invited to all school programs and they are provided appropriate support as needed. All ELLs attend music, dance and engineering classes 5 days per week. in music class students sing and use rhythm instruments. All students in our school learn to read music and play piano through the MUSIC AND THE BRAIN program. Music helps support the ELLs in listening skills through songs and chants. They learn about different cultural instruments and songs. Dance and engineering classes offer students a rich and motivating context for learning and using language. These classes provide opportunities for direct application of vocabulary and ideas and 21st century technology. Students learning English can experience new words and build on their second language as they engage in physical activity through TPR (Total Physical Response). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our classrooms have leveled libraries, SMART Boards, computers, laptops, iPads and document camera readers. SMART boards are used to accommodate different learning styles. All forms of media– videos, photographs, graphs, maps, illustrations, games, etc. can be used on the board, scaffolding the learning process for ELLs. This expands the range of content that can be use for teaching or presenting new information. All ELL students are provided opportunities to use RAZ-Kids, an online guided reading program with interactive ebooks, downloadable books, and reading quizzes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We provide an ENL program. Home language support is provided with bilingual dictionaries and books. Parents are encouraged to read and discuss academic content in their home language with their children as this content will help build English language skills and content understanding. This work is supported by workshops and classless for adult family members at the school and family involvement events including classroom based "Children At Work" events and Family Fun Nights. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students in each grade level are assessed using formative and summative assessements to help inform next instructional steps to meet the student’s needs. For example, Fountas and Pinnel, a one-to-one assessment, help match students to their instructional and independent reading level. ELL needing additional support are offered RTI (response to intervention) through small groups instruction. Additional support in early literacy skills are offered to struggling readers to target their strengths and weaknesses and meet their improvement goals. These supports are aligned to their specific needs, ages and proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of our classrooms have leveled libraries, SMART Boards, computers, laptops, iPads and document camera readers. Smartbboards are used to accommodate different learning styles. All forms of media– videos, photographs, graphs, maps, illustrations, games, etc. can be used on the board, scaffolding the learning process for ELLs. This expands the range of content that can be use for teaching or presenting new information. All ELL students are provided opportunities to use RAZ-Kids, an online guided reading program with interactive ebooks, downloadable books, and reading quizzes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 52  When families and studnets come to the school before the start of the year our Parent Coordinator, Monika Vargas, will meet incoming students, some of which are ELLs, and enroll each family for the upcoming year. We understand that these students need consistent language instruction, especially in their first couple of years in the country, in order to achieve the highest level of English fluency; therefore, ELL students are always invited to participate in all programs offered by our school. Our Dance, Music and Engineering teachers are in charge of our PBIS program, student of the month ceremony and performances which all ELL students participate in. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are a Prek-2nd grade school and do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for the ENL teacher is provided by the Borough Field Support Office. Their workshops are usually led by Fanny Castro, among others. The ENL teacher also participates in other Professional Development series offered by the Department of ELLs and then turnkeys this information to all teachers in our school. Common branch/early childhood teachers are provided job-embedded professional development by the ENL teacher during regularly scheduled grade level meetings and during contractual Monday PD sessions. Weekly professional development sessions provide an opportunity for all teachers to receive professional development in the area of CCLS and our school curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our parent coordinator and school guidance counselor receive PD as needed to help support ELLs as they transition into the upper elementary school. The ENL teacher is also involved in answering questions and offering support to parents. In order to meet the 15% of ENL PD required for classroom teachers, the ENL teacher delivers ELL PD at various sessions throughout the year. This happens during staff development and other after school sessions. All classroom teachers are present at these sessions in order to acquire a variety of ELL teaching strategies. The topics of these PDs are determined by student needs and teacher observations and requests. Attendance is taken in all sessions and copies are maintained in a binder. 2018-19 CEP 53  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Families of ELLs are entitled to an annual one-on-one meeting to discuss the goals and language development needs of their child. This is in addition to their regular parent-teacher conferences. We plan this meeting around the midway point of the school year (January) so that the timing keeps it separate from the other conferences. At this point in the year the teachers are very familiar with students' individual needs and can explain to parents how their children are progressing through the school year. We can provide a majority of translation/interpretation needs in house but if parents need translation in other languages we utilize the over-the-phone interpretation service available through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Department. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are a welcome and important part of our school community. We include all parents in every activity and when necessary provide translation/interpretation services, either through the DOE service or staff/parent volunteers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jane Murphy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Early Childhood Discovery and School DBN: 03M185 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jane Murphy Title Principal none Assistant Principal Monika Vargas Parent Coordinator Varda Poulad ENL/Bilingual Teacher Melissa Chu Parent Kaitlyn Lynch Teacher/Subject Area none none none Ilene Altschul none none none none Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 6/ 2017 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M185 School Name: Discovery and Design Magnet School Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is administered to all of our incoming students and is reviewed by the ELL coordinator to identify the parents' preferred language of communication in order for us to translate letters and documents appropriately. Based on this data, we can use the T/I Unit's over-the-phone interpretation service during parent teacher conferences and ELL parent meetings when necessary. Additionally, phone conferences can be scheduled with the Parent Coordinator. NYC Department of Education provides translation services for form letters and most written communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language For our school, 19 families prefer Spanish for written and oral communication, 1 family prefers Fulani for written and oral communication and 1 family prefers Wolof for written and oral communication. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates the following information in English and in Spanish: newsletters (Monthly), parent-teacher conference announcements (1 week before each conference, see below for dates), school holidays and breaks (1 week before each scheduled holiday and break). 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Our school holds four parent-teacher conferences a year with the Parent Coordinator or ENL teacher available provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 58  to translate for any Spanish speaking parent. These occur during the preset dates determined by the New York City Department of Education (9/17, 11/4-5, 3/2-3, and 5/12). Any interactions that occur during IEP meetings, meetings with the guidance counselor, or informational meetings with teachers can be assisted and translated by the Parent Coordinator or ENL teacher. We also have an additional ELL meeting. Families that speak lower incidence language have the option of using the DOE's T/I Unit's over-the-phone service for interpretation needs. ELL parents will be invited to attend an additional conference with the ENL teacher in January 2016 to discuss student goals and language acquisition progress. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure that parents that prefer languages other than English and Spanish have available to them over the phone interpretation services and parent-facing documents in their preferred language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 59   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is positioned at the front entrance of our school along with the Language ID Guide. The Parents Guide to Language Access is available in the Parent Coordinator's office. The Parents' Bill of Rights is included in our Parent Handbook which is available and given to parents at Parent-Teacher Conferences and other events hosted by our Parent Coordinator. All notification documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school repeatedly requests feedback from the school every month in our "Children at Work" events where parents submit surveys. Additionally, parent surveys are given at Parent-Teacher Conferences about a variety of services the school offers. Both the ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator talk to parents before and after school, and via the phone to ask parents if they have any questions or concerns related to the quality and availability of services. In addition to the "School Environment Survey" parents this year will answer survey questions about their translation and interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 60 
