2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M188 School Name: P.S. 188 THE ISLAND SCHOOL Principal: SUANY RAMOS 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/MS 188 – The Island School 01M188 310100010188 PreK – Grade 8 School Number (DBN): 442 East Houston Street, New York, NY 10002 212.677.5710 Phone Number: 212.228.3007 Fax: Suany Ramos Sramos4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Suany Ramos Theresa Doughty Nena Horton Brian Farley Mary Varia N/A N/A Jason Hasko District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, New York, NY 10002 CChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212.353.2948 Phone Number: 718.796.8657 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, NYC, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Suany Ramos Theresa Doughty Nena Horton N/A Mary Viera N/A N/A Jason Hasko Christopher Morley Yvette Miller-Collins Brian Farley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Elected UFT Elected UFT Elected UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Ian Gold RosiellDifo Marcelle Mohamed Lishan Gerard-Cobbs Gil Vega Katy Gonzales Luz Figueroa Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elected UFT Elected UFT Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission Statement: Our goal is not only for each student to be successful academically, but to identify and nurture each student’s talents, thereby creating meaningful pathways to high school and beyond. We believe that 2018-19 CEP 9  talent development supports school success, employment success, and lifelong learning. We also believe that in supporting our parents and families through comprehensive wrap-around services, we will enhance our students’ well-being and learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Background: PS/MS 188 is a Full-Service Community School dedicated to supporting struggling Lower East Side families residing in three adjacent public housing complexes and a nearby temporary housing facility. Serving approximately 450 PreK-Grade 8 students in 2017-18, PS/MS 188 is one of 47 schools citywide to be designated by the NYC DOE as a "Showcase School." Implementing a full-service community school model, we strive to be a center for educational excellence and to provide 24/6 learning, youth development and support services for our children and families. STRATEGIC COLLABORATIONS & INITIATIVES 1. OST Programs : In partnership with The Educational Alliance and NYCDOE, PS/MS 188 implements grants supporting extended day, Saturday, Vacation and Summer programming, offering a balanced mix of educational support/tutoring, enrichment, talent development and youth development. 2. NYCDOE's Middle School Quality Initiative for Grades 6-8. 2. Renzulli’s Schoolwide Enrichment Model, in collaboration with UConn's National Research Center for Gifted & Talented 3. Dual Language Program (currently PreK-Grade 4, expanding one grade per year) 5. Advanced Placement courses in (Living Environment, Mathematics) 6. Advanced Technology/Media program (Middle School & Upper Elementary School) 7. Multiple Residencies in collaboration with NYC arts/cultural organizations (The Educational Alliance, Marquis Studios, Rosie's Theatre Kids, Disney Musicals in the Schools, Third Street Music School Settlement) 8. Cahn Fellowship program STRATEGIC COLLABORATIONS OST Programs : 2018-19 CEP 10  With the goal of expanding the range and quality of services, we have developed longstanding partnerships with two of NYC’s outstanding out-of-school time organizations: (1) ExpandED Schools; and (2) The Educational Alliance. In partnership with this consortium, PS/MS 188 provides Extended Day, Saturday programming, Vacation School and summer programming (academics, talent development, and youth development. To support OST programs, we partner with: New York Cares (approximately 30 volunteers on Saturdays, corporate trips); Reading Partners (1:1 reading support); Jewish Family Board (1:1 counseling by clinical social workers); Borough of Manhattan Community College (Family Literacy, Adult Education); and the NYCDOE Office of Safety & Youth Development (Bo Diaz, Content Expert, Students in Temporary Housing); AmeriCorps, . Wrap-Around Services: Physical Health & Mental Health: Ryan-NENA Community Health Center (on-site medical, health, well-being, and off=site referrals; Jewish Family Board (mental health, counseling for children and families, off-site psychiatric referrals); Yale University. Universities: Columbia University’s Teachers College (Principal’s Leadership Group); Metropolitan College, NYU, Forham University (student teachers and field placement students); SUNY Oswego (field placement students); Borough of Manhattan Community College (Adult Ed, including on-site ESL and off-site GED, college studies); AmeriCorps, NYC DOE Office of Safety & Youth Development (Bo Diaz, Content Expert, Students in Temporary Housing) Arts Organizations: SEA (Society of the Educational Arts; Repertorio Espanol;, Disney Musicals in Schools, Enact, Marquis Studios. NYC Office of Safety & Youth Development (Bo Diaz/Content Expert, Students in Temporary Housing Civic and Educational & Cultural CBOs: Reading Partners (1:1 tutoring in reading for at-risk students during school day and extended day); New York Cares (school beautification; links and facilitates corporate volunteer educational and recreational projects; school beautification). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS/MS 188 is a Title 1 school, with 97% of students' families incomes at or below the federal poverty index. Our enrollment is comprised of student populations most-at-risk: temporary housing (47% -- the second highest percentage across all NYC DOE schools); Students with Disabilities (33%); English Language Learners 22%; Latino (62%); African American (32%). Needs of Sub-populations: Students in Temporary Housing: Many of the families living in temporary housing are homeless due to issues of domestic violence. Thus, in addition to the challenges of being uprooted from their homes, many of our children have experience trauma related to domestic violence. These children often exhibit behavioral challenges that result in 2018-19 CEP 11  classroom disruption and physically acting-out behaviors, requiring an extensive social-emotional support system. Many of these students are performing significantly below grade level, often a result of disruptions in their education. Students with Disabilities: With 33% of students classified as needing Special Education services, our school has disproportionately high representation of Students With Disabilities (SWDs). The majority of these students have social-emotional challenges as well as academic. English Language Learners. Our ELL students also struggle with academic and social-emotional challenges. Despite ENL services, the challenge of acquiring grade- level competency in core subject areas can be overwhelming. Additionally, many of our ENL students' families struggle with issues related to poverty, housing, as well as immigration, creating additional social -emotional pressures. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. STRENGTHS & ACCOMPLISHMENTS 1. Ratings of Well Developed and Proficient on most recent School Quality Review, and Effective Status on Principal’s 2017-18 Performance Review. 2. Instructional Media Technology curricula 3. Improved understanding and implementation of Danielson Framework (emphasis on 1.e and 3d) 4. Continuous progress in implementation and refinement of our Full-Service Community School model 5. Leveraging of funding through multiple grants, including: NYS Community School grant, NYC DOE Community School grant; NYCDOE Office of Arts & Special Projects ELL/SWD arts grant; Literacy Zone grant in collaboration with Borough of Manhattan Community College. CHALLENGES 1. increase academic achievement school wide 2. continue to support social-emotional and behavioral needs of students school wide 3. continue to reduce chronic absenteeism 4. increase progress of Special Education students school wide 5. increase progress of English Language Learners school wide 2018-19 CEP 12  AREAS OF FOCUS: 2018-19 TEACHING & LEARNING 1. Introduce MQUIP initiative (Grades 6-8), to support: (a) increased achievement in ELA; and (b) literacy across all subject areas to support comprehension and depth of knowledge. 2. Intensify schoolwide English Language Arts Initiative K-8 initiative through Principal participation in Cahn Fellowship which will focus on implementation of Teachers College Readers & Writers Workshop model. 3 . Continued focus on Danielson, with continued emphasis on 1.e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3D (Assessment) 4. Continued focus on differentiation for all students (e.g., through flexible groupings, “station-teaching, technology- infused and assisted instruction. 5. Continued focus on inter-disciplinary learning 6. Continued emphasis on utilizing multiple data sources to inform instruction 7. Continue to increase academic progress of ELL and SWD students 8. Introduce Tier 3 reading intervention program (Wilson Learning). COORDINATE AND INTEGRATE WRAP-AROUND SERVICES, with emphasis on: 1. Continued reduction of chronic absenteeism 2. Reduction of number of incidents occurring outside of classroom (particularly in Elementary), with emphasis on arrivals/dismissal 3. Continued reduction of instructional time lost due to behavioral disruptions 4. Continue to implement ‘service plans’ for targeted students, providing systematic referral, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of academic/behavioral/social emotional supports/services provided by 188 faculty, Educational Alliance Community Educators, and members of our Community School Services Teams (i.e., CBO social workers). 5. Continue to refine our Community School infrastructure 6. Secure additional funding sources for OST programming 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M188 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 433 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 35 35 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 90.8% % Reduced Lunch 15.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 66.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 65% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 107 107 88.9% 0.5% 29.1% 29.3% 1.8% 0.0% 2 0% 5 30.1% 50% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student Progress: To gain a deeper understanding of students learning needs, we use multiple sources of data to support the instructional program at our school. These sources of data include but are not limited to NYS exam scores, benchmark assessments, mock testing results, and classroom performance data. Based on these data results, we determine areas of strength and weakness of a grade, class, as well as individual students. In collaboration the administrative and instructional teams collect evidence to monitor school's progress of data use. Student Achievement: Testing results on NYS Math and ELA tests for 2017-18 have not yet been released. Achievement on these tests for the past two years (2015-16 and 2016-17) have increased. While the school met its NYS target for student achievement, the percentage of students performing at grade level equivalency or above remains low. We are awaiting current NY state results. Mathematics: According to our end of year assessments, student proficiency levels went up, averaging 26.5% growth compared to data from January of 2018. After looking at this data, the Math Department met with the Algebra for All Instructional coach. Together they redesigned curriculum maps, and revisited current practices incorporated in the Mathematics classroom. With the goal of increasing student achievement, a shared decision was made to modify instructional practices – specifically scheduling of station teaching and incorporating 90 minutes of Khan Academy into Mathematics instructional time. In the stations students are grouped by tier levels. Each station has very clear, specific skill that is covered, with differing levels of supports along a continuum of teacher-led instruction (including 1:1 support) to independent work. English Language Arts: Using the reading data from Performance Series (October to May) and student reading data from Teacher’s College running records (Fountas and Pinnell levels and TCRWP benchmarks) we found that 44% of Students with Disabilities in Grades 6-8 who scored below grade level on the October 2017 benchmark reading assessment, demonstrated accelerated growth in reading comprehension, as measured by reading gains of at least one year from their individual October 2017 baseline scores on the Scantron Performance Series reading assessment. This represents an 2018-19 CEP 15  improvement from October 2017, when 26% of SWDs were reading on or above grade level (making at least one year's progress each year). However, in looking at this data, the team noted that use of new teaching practices were needed in literacy classrooms. Multiple models of Co-Teaching were implemented to reduce instructional group size and create more opportunities for students to respond during a lesson. Teachers referenced previously taught content and/or strategies, used explicitly taught vocabulary (pronunciation, student-friendly definitions). Teachers used verbal and visual prompts (e.g. demonstrations using whiteboard, charts, slides) to explain new content or strategy. Classes modeled concepts and skills by making thinking visible through the use of a think-aloud. Teachers continue to look at word meaning, literary vs. non-literal from an informational text, as well as referring to details when planning for instruction. In 2017-2018 school year, Grades K-2 used Core Knowledge. While this program provides a comprehensive, systematized approach to building phonemic awareness/decoding skills and vocabulary development, it does not offer a writing component. Given this, we initiated use of Teachers Writers Workshops Teachers in grades K-2 (Writing in 2015-16 and Reading in 2016-17). Ten (10) days of professional development on-site, including classroom labs, will be provided this year. Using the above-mentioned data results, our focus remains on the following standards: For Grades 3-5 these are the Mathematics CCLS identified: CCLS. S3.MD.B.3 Drawing a scaled picture graph and a scaled bar graph to represent a data set with several categories. Solve one- and two-step "how many more" and "how many less" problems using information presented in scaled bar graphs. CCLS 4.NF.B.4Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction by a whole number. CCLS.5.MD.B.2 Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Use operations on fractions for this grade to solve problems involving information presented in line plots. 6th grade: Apply And Extend Previous Understandings of Multiplication and Division to Multiply and Divide Fractions For Grades 6-8 these are the Mathematics CCLS identified: CCLS. 6.RP.A.2 Understand the concept of a unit rate a/b associated with a ratio a:b with b ≠ 0, and use rate language in the context of a ratio relationship. CCLS 8.EE.5 Understand the connections between proportional relationships, lines, and linear equations For Grades 3-5 these are the ELA CCLS identified: LA.4.RI.4.2: Determine the main idea of a text and explain how it is supported by key details; summarize the text. LA.4.RI.4.4: Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words or phrases in a text relevant to a grade 4 topic or subject area. ELL.5-8.1.1: Identify and use reading and listening strategies to make text comprehensible and meaningful For Grades 3-5 these are the ELA CCLS identified: LA.6-8.WHST.6-8.1.a: Introduce claim(s) about a topic or issue, acknowledge and distinguish the claim(s) from alternate or opposing claims, and organize the reasons and evidence logically. 2018-19 CEP 16  ELL.5-8.1.16: Apply learning strategies to acquire information and make texts comprehensible and meaningful. LA.6.W.6.1.b: Support claim(s) with clear reasons and relevant evidence, using credible sources and demonstrating an understanding of the topic or text. Based on the above, Superintendent’s PPO visit, School Quality Review, 2016-17 DEPUTY Superintendent’s PPO visit and Principal Performance Review , the following overall priorities were identified. 1. increase academic achievement of ELLs 2. move at least 50% of ELL students taking NYSELAT at least one level up on NYSELAT (e.g., Beginner to Intermediate, Intermediate to Advanced). 3. increase academic achievement for SWDs 4. continue to increase use of flexible groupings and use of technology to assure differentiation for all students (e.g., station models) 5. continue focus on Danielson Framework with emphasis on 1.e and 3d 6. increased emphasis on providing teacher feedback based on Danielson framework to support instructional focus 7. refine implementation of Teachers Writers Workshop school wide 8. continue to transfer writing strategies to content areas (i.e., Math, Science), as applicable 9. continue to provide sustained, ongoing focus on professional development of rubrics and implementation schoolwide 10. continue to support ELLs and at-risk students with increased staffing ratio The following annual goal focuses specifically on English Language Arts, given that schoolwide achievement in English Language Arts is significantly below achievement in Mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As part of PS/MS 188's school wide Literacy initiative, elementary and middle school ELA teams (including Gen Ed, ENL and ICT teachers) supported by Teachers College Literacy Coach, Assistant Principal and Principal) will implement and refine targeted strategies so that 10% of Grades 3-8 students who scored Level 1 or level 2 on the 2018 NYS ELA test, will move up a minimum of one proficiency level (i.e., Level 1 to 2, or Level 2 to 3), as measured by the Spring 2019 NYS standardized ELA test. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to departmentalize daily instruction in Grades 3-8 (one ELA and one Math teacher per grade level (SOP 3.2) All Grades 3-8 students Sept 2018-June 2019 Continue to refine implementation of Teachers Readers & Writers' Workshop pedagogy and assessment systems (Grades 3-8), including hiring of part-time Literacy Coach to provide 10 on-site PD sessions/classroom labs annually for ELA /ICT teachers; participation in MSQIP, and Principal Participation in Cahn Fellowship program Initiate implementation of MSQIP, Grades 6-8. All Grades 3-8 students Sept 2018– June 2019 All Grades 6-8 students Sept 2018– June 2019 Initiate one period Strategic Reading daily for all Grades 6-8 students, as part of MSQIP initiative. All Grades 6-8 students Sept 2018-June 2019 Continue to use Expeditionary Learning in Grades 3-8 to support development of decoding skills (SOP 3.2) All Grades 3-5 students Sept 2018– June 2019 Initiate Principal participation in Cahn Fellowship program with targeted focus on creating infrastructure and expertise to support increased literacy achievement schoolwide. All Grades 3-8 students Sept 2018– June 2019 Initiate use of Wilson Learning for Tier 3 students (Grades 3-8) Continue professional development in Danielson Framework with continued emphasis on 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and additional focus on 3d (Assessment) (SOP 3.2, 3.3, 3.5) (Conference Days, and on-going via informal teacher meetings, Monday PD sessions, etc.) Targeted students, Grades 3-8 Sept 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers Gr. 3-8 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ELA and Math Teachers (Grades 3-8), with oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal. ELA Teachers Grades 3-8, with oversight by Princiipal, A.P., Teachers College Literacy Coach Oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal All Grades 6-8 Teachers, oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal All Grades 3-5 Teachers, oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal All Grades 3-8 ELA Teachers, ENL and ICT Teachers, oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal Teacher(s) to be identified, oversight by Principal and Assistant Principal Assistant Principal with oversight by Principal 2018-19 CEP 18  Minimum of weekly ELA team meetings (Grades 3-5 and Grades 6-8) to: (1) pinpoint student weaknesses; (2) identify and implement targeted strategies, and (3) determine and implement modifications needed based on periodic data analysis (including Test prep data analysis). (SOP 3.2) Continue to include AIS in ELA/Humanities Grades 3-8 (SOP 3.2) Sept 2018– June 2019 Grades 3-8 Gen Ed ELA teachers, ENL and ICT teachers, with oversight by Teachers College Literacy consultant, Assistant Principal, Principal Sept 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Grades 3-8 student who scored Level 1 or Level 2 on 2017 NYS ELA test Grades 3-8 students who scored Level 1 or 2 on NYS 2017 ELA test Continue to use recently-retired PS/MS 188 teacher(s) to support new teachers with embedded (in-classroom) professional development in use of assessment, curricula implementation, and pedagogy. (SOP 3.2 and SOP 3.5) All students Gr K-8 Sept 2018– June 2019 Increase interdisciplinary learning options based on Schoolwide Enrichment Model, including co-teaching opportunities, social action projects, and arts-infused curricula (e.g, (SOP 3.4) All students Grades 3-8 Sept 2018– June 2019 Continue annual grade-by-grade expansion of 188's Dual Language Program, by adding one 5th grade Dual Language class Continue professional development in Danielson Framework with continued emphasis on 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and additional focus on 3d (Assessment) (SOP 3.2, 3.3, 3.5) (Conference Days, and on-going via informal teacher meetings, Monday PD sessions, etc.) Grade 5 students (one class) Sept 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers Gr. 3-8 Sept 2018– June 2019 Continue professional development in Applying ENL Strategies to Vocabulary Development and Comprehension for All Students (SOP 3.2) (4 sessions annually, during Monday PDs) All Teachers Gr 3-8 Nov 2018- Jan 2019 Ed Performance will be completed every 12 weeks to identify student-specific needs (SOP 3.5) All students Gr. 3-8 Sept 2018, February 2019, May 2019 Continue to implement monthly parent workshops to support parents' understanding of CCLS and how to support their children academically. All parents Gr. 3-8 Oct 2018-May 2019 F-Status 188 teachers, with oversight by Assistant Principal and Principal Gr. Gr. 3-8 ELA, ENL, ICT and IT Teachers, with oversight by Assistant Principal and Principal Grade 5 Math and ELA teachers, with oversight by Assistant Principal and Principal Assistant Principal with oversight by Principal Elementary and Middle School ENL Teachers, with oversight by Assistant Principal, Principal ELA teachers, with oversight by Assistant Principal Assistant Principal, Gr. 3-8 ELA teachers, ENL teachers, Parent Coordinator, CS Director, Principal 2018-19 CEP 19 ENL teachers, Speech & Language Therapists, Related Service providers, as appropriate, will continue to support at-risk students within the classroom setting (20% push-in) (SOP 2) All Gr. 3-8 SWD and at-risk students Sept 2018– June 2019 Continue technical support and professional development for teachers to increase and/or refine use of technology-infused and technology-assisted instruction All Staff Gr. 3-8 Sept 2018– June 2019 S/L, ENL, OT providers, with oversight by Assistant Principal, Principal 188's Techbrarian, Staff with identified expertise, with oversight by Assistant Principal, Principal Initiate use of Explicit Instruction RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool during daily learning walks by administration and observation cycles INSTRUCTIONAL CABINET WILL REVIEW GRADE 3-8 ELA and SOCIAL STUDIES (HUMANITIES) CURRICULA TO ASSURE CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE CURRIDULA AND INCLUSIVE PRACTICES> PRIORITY A (1) ESTABLISH ENL CLUB TO ______________________________________ PRIORITY A (1) All Gr.3-8 teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to grade level Parent Orientation meetings in Early Fall, our school implements monthly parent workshops (October - May) focused on how parents can support their children in meeting Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in each of the core subject areas. The Assistant Principal, in collaboration with faculty members and Parent Coordinator, are responsible for development of the workshops, and implementation. Principal and Assistant Principal monitor oversight. Parent Coordinator, along with Community School Director are responsible in collaboration with classroom teachers, for outreach. Community School Director and Parent Coordinator track parent attendance. In addition, teachers are encouraged to reach out to parents individually on "Talk Tuesdays" regarding academic, as well as other issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principal Hire Teachers College Writers Workshop Coach: 10 days for Grades 3-5, and 10 days for Grades 6-8 cohort. Technology Equipment, In-house Staff with technology expertise Continued funding of 2 full-time ENL teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  Extended Day / Saturday OST academic support/enrichment/test prep Use of substitute parasprofessionals to provide additional academic support Professional Development in Writers’ Workshop provided by Teachers College Embedded P.D. (in classroom) by F-status teachers (former 188 Literacy teachers) retired teacher(s). Summer PD for teachers in Ready GEN Parent Coordinator Per Session for MSQI (Grades 6-8 teachers) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A minimum of 10% of Grades 3-8 students who scored Level 1 or Level 2 on 2018 NYS English Language Arts test will demonstrate a minimum of a year-and-a-half increase on January 2019 ELA Mock Testing and/or February 2019 English Language Arts Ed Performance tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2019 Mock ELA Testing (January 2019) and ELA Ed Performance (2019) for Grades 3-8 students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Accomplishments Through our full-service community school initiative, we are providing extensive wrap-around services to our students and our parents, through the partnerships described previously in the first section of the CEP. We are very proud that in the most recently released School Survey results, wherein over 90% of respondents responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment. Accomplishments include: 1. Expanded social-emotional supports for students provided by Jewish Board (on-site clinical social workers) and by The Educational Alliance social worker intern. 2. Integral to 188's initiative, we have established a Social-Emotional & Mental Health Committee that uses a case-study approach to identify students at-risk, and to develop and monitor and assess individualized service plans for each student (and her/his family as appropriate) 3. Continued school wide training in R.U.L.E.R. (Yale University Center for Social Emotional Learning approaches to trauma-informed practice 4. 25 staff (teachers, related service providers, paraprofessionals) were trained this year in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) practices 4. Designation by NYC DOE for third consecutive year as one of NYC DOE's 47 "Showcase Schools" for best practices in Parent Engagement and Extended Day. Challenges PS/MS 188 has the second largest percentage of students (47%) across NYC public schools living in temporary housing. The majority of these students live at NYC temporary housing facilities. Many of these families struggle with issues related to domestic violence. As a consequence, many of our students are in turmoil, particularly those in the 2018-19 CEP 22  younger grades. We also serve a disproportionately high percentage of students with disabilities (33%), many of whom have behavioral challenges. PRIORITY NEEDS 1. Continue social-emotional support for all students is a priority need for all students 2. Utilize SAVE room, and related personnel (the latter based on funding availability) 3. Continue to implement ladder of referral 4. Continue to Increase student “voice and choice” (emphasis on Grades 3-8) 5. Complete training of all school staff in Trauma Crisis Intervention in Schools 6. Collaboration between school staff (including on-site social workers) and parents to implement aligned beha 7. Reduce chronic absenteeism Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, improvement in student behaviors will be evidenced by a 3% reduction of Level 4 and Level 5 behavioral incidents school wide, as as part of our school wide social-emotional support initiative which is implemented by all stakeholders (i.e., teachers, administrators, PS/MS 188 staff and CBO staff, Parent Coordinator), 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase number of on-site CBO clinical social workers and interns, thereby increasing school's capacity to provide weekly counseling to identified students to expand number of students receiving mental health services. At-risk students Gr. K-8 Sept. 2018-June 2019 OORs data reviewed monthly during PPT meetings to identify trends and develop strategies to address rises in occurrences. All Students Sept-18 June 19 Jewish Board Social Workers and Interns; Ed Alliance Social Worker interns; oversight by CBO clinical supervisor(s) and Principal De-Escalation Team, Dean Team and Assistant Principal Continue reconfigured Elementary School breakfast (Gr. K-5), including traffic flow in cafeteria, how/when' students are served, including initiation of support by K-5 classroom teachers (SOP 5.4) All students K-5 Sept '18 - Classroom teachers June '19 Continue newly initiated lunch schedule and lunchtime seating arrangements All students K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Continue to increase staff capacity to utilize trauma-informed practices in- and out of classroom (e.g., R.U.L.E.R.) Continue to implement Attendance Improvement initiative (SOP5.2) K-Gr. 8 staff, and K-Gr. After-School Staff Sept '18 - June '19 Sept 18-June 19 Targeted students Grades PreK - 8 Continue daily support at arrivals and dismissal (i.e., Dean, Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator, Ed Alliance Community Educators, At-Risk CBO Social Worker (SOP 5.4 and 5.2) All students Sept 18-June 19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Consultants from R.U.L.E.R. (Yale University) , oversight by Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, CS Director, Parent Coordinator, members of 188 Attendance Team (oversight by Community School Director) Principal, Assistant Principal, Dean, 2018-19 CEP 24  Continue to reinforce revised practices and monitoring with respect to use of bathrooms school wide (SOP 5.4) All students Sept 18-June 19 Utilize recently retired PS/MS 188 teacher(s) to support new teachers in classroom management (SOP 5.4) New Teachers as needed Sept 18-June 19 Use substitute paraprofessionals in- and out-of-the-classroom(s) to support positive behavior and social-emotional needs of targeted students (SOP 5.4) Targeted classes Sept 18-June 19 Continue student government initiative Grades 3-8 (SOP 5.3) Gr. 3-8 Sept 18-June 19 Guidance Counselors, At-Risk Counselor, Ed Alliance Community Educators, CS Director (Oversight by AP) Assistant Principal, Principal, Dean Guidance Counselor, At-Risk Counselor (oversight by Principal) Assistant Principal, new teachers, F-status teacher(s) - oversight by AP Assistant Principal, sub-paras (oversight by AP) Assistant Principal, Upper Elementary and Middle School teachers (oversight by AP) Continue to use student surveys, student-led lessons and student-led newsletter (SOP 5.3) Gr 3-8 Sept 18-June 19 Assistant Principal, CS staff, teachers Continue to implement LIFE SKILLS Parent Workshops to support social-emotional development needs of students (SOP 5.3) Gr. K-8 to Grade 8 Oct 18-May 19 Continue parent workshop series Supporting Your Child's Social-Emotional Growth, using trauma-informed practices Parents K-Gr. 8 Oct 18- May 19 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, CS staff, external partners (oversight by AP) R.U.LE.R Consultant, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, CS Director (oversight by AP, Principal, CS Director) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A series of workshops to train parents in Cornell University's Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) and R.U.L.E.R. approaches will be implemented. While these will be open to all parents, there will be outreach to parents 2018-19 CEP 25  of targeted students. Key personnel include AP, Parent Coordinator, on-site CBO social worker(s), and consultants from Yale University Center for Emotional Learning. Time frame will extend over the course October - May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principal, Dean, Guidance Counselors, At-Risk Counselor, Extended Day Staff, Community Educators, Parent Coordinator, Community School Coordinator, Paraprofessionals, schedule modifications, F-Status PS/MS 188 recently retired teachers, substitute paraprofessionals, consultants from R.U.L.E.R. (Yale University); utilization of Elementary K-5 teachers during breakfast; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a minimum of 3% decrease in Level 4 and 5 behavioral incidents school wide. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs Reports submitted to NYC DOE Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS/MS 188 received a Well Developed rating in the category of "High Expectations" on its most recent Quality Review. " Supporting evidence cited included a high level of collaboration between school leaders, teacher and staff. Through systematic and ongoing and differentiated professional development, our teachers seek to improve daily practice to support increased academic achievement. Administration is committed to building on faculty members’ strengths, delegating leadership and encouraging faculty to seek each other out for support. We have found that increased involvement of teachers and staff in leadership roles, has had a positive impact on the school culture, instructional practices, and school environment. As a learning community we are committed to taking full advantage of the additional UFT-contractually mandated time for weekly professional development. In 2017-18 we continued to provide differentiated professional development for targeted groups of teachers (i.e., new teachers, teachers with evaluation rating of “Developing,” ICT teachers, etc.). This has included in-school professional development, and out-of-school. Another focus has been to increase opportunities for teachers to learn from their peers, including inter-visitations within 188 and at other schools. Co-teaching also provides a unique opportunity for our faculty to learn from one another. PRIORITIES IN 2018-2019 1. Continued emphasis on distributed leadership and teacher collaboration 2. Increased emphasis on, and guidance for teachers in providing peer feedback to each other based on Danielson framework through peer review of lesson plans, peer observations, and informal inter-visitations. 3. Continued emphasis on teacher and student use of multiple data sources to inform daily instruction, increase student ownership of learning, and increase achievement 4. Initiate Middle School Quality Initiative professional development for all Grades 6-8 teachers 5. Continue professional development in Teachers College Readers & Writers Workshop 6. Principal participation in Cahn Fellowship Program which will focus on Teachers College Readers & Writers Initiative 7. . Foster increased interdisciplinary collaboration, applying Renzulli’s Schoolwide Enrichment Model and technology integration (The School wide Enrichment Model is an organizational plan for delivering enrichment and acceleration 2018-19 CEP 27  through an integrated continuum of services. Services provided by the model range from general enrichment for both wide-ranging and targeted subgroups to highly individualized curriculum modification procedures for rapid learners and first-hand investigative opportunities for highly motivated individuals and small groups. The Schoolwide Enrichment Model provides educators with the means to develop the talent potentials of young people by systematically assessing their strengths; providing enrichment opportunities, resources, and services to develop the strengths; and using a flexible approach to curricular differentiation and the use of school time. 8. improve the academic performance of all students in all areas of the regular curriculum and to blend standard curriculum activities with meaningful enrichment learning. 9. . promote continuous, reflective, growth-oriented professionalism of school personnel to such an extent that many faculty members emerge as leaders in curriculum and staff development, program planning, etc. 10. create a learning community that honors ethnic, gender, and cultural diversity, and promotes mutual respect, democratic principles, and the preservation of the Earth's resources. 11. implement a collaborative school culture that includes appropriate decision-making opportunities for students, parents, teachers, and administrators. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will engage in 15-20 hours of professional development in pedagogical and/or assessment practices identifed by Administration to be in need of improvement. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop and monitor individualized professional development plans for teachers reflecting areas of targeted growth identified by Administration Initiate use of Explicit Instruction RSE-TASC Walk-Through Tool to support development of individualized teacher professional development plans. Continue on-site professional development in Teachers College Readers & Writers Workshop by Teacher College coach (including classroom labs), and interface with MSQIP (Grades 6-8). Initiate MSQIP (Grades 6-8) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers PreK- Gr. 8 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal All Teachers PreK-Gr. 8 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal All Teachers Gr. 3-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal All Teachers Sept 2018– June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Gr. 6-8 Continue ongoing professional development in Danielson Framework with emphasis on 1.e and 3.d. (SOP 4.2) All Teachers PreK-Gr. 8 Sept 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Facilitate scheduling to enable teacher inter-visitations, peer observations, co-teaching, and subsequent feedback exchange (SOP 4.2) Continue ongoing professional development for all teachers in use of Danielson Framework to generate effective feedback to peers in response to peer inter-visitations, peer lesson plan review and peer observations. (SOP 4.2, 4.3, 4.4) All Teachers PreK-Gr. 8 Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal All Teachers PreK-Gr. 8 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Initiate sharing of best practices amongst the three co-located schools through CDCP grant. All Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Continue ongoing emphasis on use of data (multiple sources) by teachers and students to support daily instruction, student ownership of learning, and increased academic growth Grade 3-8 students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Identified teachers, Administration from PS/MS 188, Girls Prep Charter School and District 75’s P94@188. Teachers, supported by Principal, Assistant Principal Ongoing identification of leadership positions needed to support school wide, division-wide and grade-wide instructional and programmatic needs during regular and extended day (SOP 4.4) Identification of school Division Team Leaders for Early Childhood grades (K-2), Upper Elementary (Gr. 3-5) and Middle School (Gr. 6-8) (SOP 4.4) and related professional development All Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Identified staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 29 Technical assistance to support teachers increased and/or refined use of technology-assisted instruction (SOP 4.4) All teachers PreK-Gr. 8 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, IT/Media Specialist Ongoing professional development in Interdisciplinary and differentiated learning (SOP 4.2) All Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops are held throughout the year to engage parents in learning about how to support their child academically. In this context, parents develop an understanding of interdisciplinary learning and teaching practices. These workshops are held monthly, by trained staff and assistant principal. Key personnel include Parent Coordinator, ELA,.Math, ICT, ENL teachers at Early Childhood, Upper Elementary and Middle School levels. and Speech & Language Therapists. Oversight to be conducted by Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, 188 faculty & staff, Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of teachers will have completed a minimum of 10 hours of professional development in area(s) identified by Administration as being in need of improvement with respect to pedagogical and/or assessment practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development tracking forms for all Gr. K-8 teachers reflecting professional development topics they requested, titles of professional development sessions they attended and hours completed (the latter as evidenced by attendance records at in- and/or out-of-school professional development sessions). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We believe that effective leadership is the result of building trust amongst teachers, administration and parents, a shared vision and commitment to high expectations, and a shared sense of urgency in closing the achievement gap. In our most recent Quality Review, PS/MS188 received a rating of Well Developed in Quality indicator 3.4, High Expectations, noting, “School leaders have established a culture of learning that communicates high expectations to staff and families in support of student learning.” The Quality Review also stated that "Effective communication and partnership with families and staff [at PS/MS 188] create a culture of mutual accountability, and supports student progress toward expectations for college and career readiness." We believe that effective leadership is the result of: (1) building trust between teachers, administration, parents and students; (2) creating a shared vision; (3) maintaining a commitment to high expectations, and (4) a shared sense uurgency amongst all stakeholders with respect to closing the achievement gap. In our most recent Quality Review, PS/MS188 received a rating of Well Developed in Quality indicator 3.4, High Expectations, noting, “School leaders have established a culture of learning that communicates high expectations to staff and families in support of student learning.” The Quality Review also stated that "Effective communication and partnership with families and staff [at PS/MS 188] create a culture of mutual accountability, and supports student progress toward expectations for college and career readiness." Leadership initiative for 2018-19 will include: 1. supporting each teacher in moving forward towards being improving pedagogical and assessment practices, using the Danielson framework as a frame of reference and by introducing the RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool (Explicit Instruction) 2. development of ELA “leaders” amongst our staff, in connection with principal’s participation in Cahn Fellowship program, and introduction of MSQI initiative 2018-19 CEP 31  3. maintaining a learning environment that communicates high expectations to staff and families in support of student learning; and 4. further enhancing communication and partnerships with families, staff, students and CBO partners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of faculty members will demonstrate improvement in at least two areas of pedagogical practice as measured by Danielson rubrics, and/or RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool (Explicit Instruction) 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Develop, monitor and update individualized teacher professional plans. All teachers, PreK-Gr.8 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Principal participation in Cahn Fellowship program All teachers, PreK-Gr.8 July 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Cahn Fellowship personnel Middle School Humanities Teacher, oversight by Principal, with participation of Cahn personnel July 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teacher participation in Cahn Fellowship program (mentee). Initiate MSQI program Middle School Humanities Teacher All Middle School teachers Initiate use of RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool (Explicit Instruction) All teachers PreK-Gr.8 July 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Support and facilitate implementation of full-service community school model in collaboration with The Educational Alliance All staff, students, families Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal in collaboration with PS/MS 188 Community School Director, and and Ed Alliance administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Community School initiative provides wraparound services including health, mental health, parent referrals and consultations respecting employment, immigration, legal matters, to name a few), adult education, family literacy events, workshops to support their children's social emotional and academic growth. Through implementation of our full-service community school initiative, parents will continue to take assume active leadership roles, through 2018-19 CEP 33  membership in the various sub-committees of our Community School Council (i.e, Mental Health/Wellness Sub-committee; Youth Development, etc.). Meetings are held regularly (minimum of bi-monthly). Key personnel include: Community School Director, Extended Day Director, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent Representatives, CBO Partnership Representatives Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal., CS Director, Parent Coordinator, Cahn Fellowship program resources; MSQI personnel resources, Teachers College Literacy Coach, Community School grant Principal, Community School Director, Extended Day Director, Assistant Principal, CBO Partner Representatives, Teachers. NYS Community School/AIDP grant, and NYC Community School Grant funding are leveraged to achieve this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will demonstrate improvement in pedagogical practice, as evidenced through Danielson rubrics and/or RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool (Explicit Instruction) and/or Danielson rubric(s). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson rubrics; RSE-TASC Classroom Walkthrough Tool (Explicit Instruction) and/or Danielson rubric(s) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths PS/MS 188 is one of 47 schools designated by NYCDOE as a “Showcase School” for its best practices in parent engagement. In the Outreach to Parents category of the 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, 98% of parents, teachers responded positively (as compared to 86% citywide). In that same Report, 99% of parents responded positively in the category of "Parent Involvement in School" (as compared to 89% citywide). As evidenced by Framework for Great Schools Report, PS/MS 188 excels at developing strong relationships and learning about the needs of our community members. Staff members spend a great deal of time getting to know students and families and fostering trusting relationships. At 188, all families are welcome and greeted in a friendly manner by all safety agents and office staff. As part of our full-service community school initiative, the school implements a survey to find out priority needs of our parents and families. Priorities are established through the working of our Community School Sub-committees and through our School Leadership Team. Priority Needs Our priority need is to continue to increase the level and scope of parent involvement in the school in order to enhance their capacity to support their children’s academic and social-emotional growth. In doing so, all sub-groups within the school will be targeted. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as part of the Community School initiative, parent participation in school events (i.e., teacher conferences, school events, parent workshops, leadership roles) will increase by 10%. Key personnel include Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Community School Partnership Representatives, Principal and Assistant Principal. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop, implement and analyze Schoolwide Parent Survey to identify parents’ areas of need/interest All parents Sept 2018 Develop and implement parent workshop series and stand-alone workshops respecting social-emotional/development and academics in response to Parent Survey to support identified needs All parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 Continue to full-service community school sub-committees, with parent representation Open to all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Develop and implement workshop series and stand- alone workshops to support parents’ identified needs (i.e., immigration services, pro bono legal services, stress reduction, etc). Open to all parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) CS School Director and Principal, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, CS Director, Principal, Assistant Principal CS Director, Principal, Parent Coordinator CS Director, Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Educational Alliance, Borough of Manhattan Community College,Ryan-NENA Community Health Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School director, Parent Coordinator, Community School CBO Partnership Representatives. Technology (e.g., Computers, Blackboard Connect), outreach materials, funding for community events. Grant funding (NYS Community School/AIDP, and NYC DOE Community School grant) are utilized to support the above. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, increase of 5% of parents will have engaged in school and/or PSA meetings and/or activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records of all parent conferences, conferences, Talk Tuesday, committee meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1:1 Extended Day, Homework Help Saturday, Evening, Tutoring Early Morning, Test Prep Vacation, Summer Small group, 1:1; Extended Day, Homework Help Saturday, Evening, Tutoring Early Morning, Test Prep Vacation, Summer Small group, 1:1; Extended Day, Homework Help Saturday, Evening, Tutoring Early Morning, Test Prep Vacation, Summer Small group, 1:1; Extended Day, Homework Help Saturday, Evening, Tutoring Early Morning, Test Prep Vacation, Summer Small group, 1:1 Early Morning, Lunch, during School-Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYStest scores in conjunction with Ed Performance & classroom assessments Mathematics Same as above Science NYStest scores for Grade 4, and class- room assessments Reading Partners, curricula aligned with CCLS; AmericaReads; computer-assisted online programs (e.g., Reading A-Z); modified materials, pacing Online programs (i.e., IXL, Khan Academy); modified materials, pacing; multi-media; AmericaCounts Online programs; modified materials, pacing Social Studies Classroom performance and Online programs, modified materials, pacing assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Pupil Personnel Team, teacher & On-site CBOsocial workers; guidance counselors;At-Risk 2018-19 CEP 38  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) administration referrals Counselor Day instruction, Extended Day 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 47%: 198 Students Students in temporary housing are provided with school uniforms, book bags, basic emergency supplies, glasses and school supplies to ensure that they are school ready. In addition to AIS counseling that is available for students, we offer universal, selective, and targeted social emotional interventions that match their need. Through various partnerships student receive in school mentoring and clinical mental health support. Students are provided with AIS supports in core content areas and extended school day opportunities. Parents are offered opportunities to attend relevant workshops, utilize school resources as needed, and are kept informed about their students progress and how they can support them at home. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors, and community school partner engage with parents regular and make referrals to local agencies that can assist them with various needs. In addition, we have partner with NYU to provide students with dental check-ups and cleanings. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A school hiring committee has been created to ensure a highly qualified applicant is selected. They are interviewed by the team and asked a specific set of questions. If they pass the first round, they are invited to return for a demonstration lesson. After the demonstration lesson, the candidate meets with available team members to reflect on the lesson. The team ensures that all applicants hold the appropriate certification for the position before they are called for an interview. Our teachers must equip our students with the competencies they need to become active citizens and workers in the 21st century. They need to personalize and differentiate learning experiences to ensure that every child has a chance to succeed. They also need to keep up with innovations in curricula, pedagogy and the development of digital resources. Our challenge is to equip all teachers, and not just some, to implement effective instruction for our diverse learners. This requires us to focus on: how to optimize the pool of individuals from which our school recruits teachers: how professional expectations are communicated; how to improve performance of struggling teachers; how to sculpt leadership and mentoring opportunities for outstanding teachers; and how to recognize exemplary performance. In order to recruit the best highly qualified teachers for our students: 1. School administration works with the Manhattan Field Support Center to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers 2. School administration takes pro-active measures to avail current non-HQT teachers with higher education opportunities. 3. School administration sets aside Title I monies to support funding for HQT. 4. School administration works with Manhattan Center Field Support Center to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 5. To retain HQ teachers, we ensure that our school celebrates and expects collaboration and continuous learning. As professionals, teachers find satisfaction in having peers who can serve as thinking partners and opportunities to 2018-19 CEP 42  develop their practice and push their own thinking. Opportunities for collaboration are built into our school schedule through common planning time and a flexible coverage schedule that enables teachers to visit each others' classes. 6. HQ attend a week long conference at UCCON: Renzulli Learning School wide Enrichment Model. ( Based on talent and interest). 7.To further develop their practice teachers receive focused and differentiated professional development 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development is in alignment with PS/MS 188’s CEP goals and strategies. We firmly believe that all students can receive rigorous CCLS aligned instruction when teachers fully understand the content and can utilize effective instructional and pedagogical practices. To accomplish this, teachers participate in a myriad of professional development opportunities. To ensure consistency and thorough understanding of practices, the principal and/ or Assistant Principal participate in most professional development opportunities alongside teachers. In addition to school level PD, consultants specializing in key areas will support teachers alongside literacy and math coaches. In addition, P2L and district and Borough resources will be utilized to provide additional professional development for teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and administrators. School administration and Teachers College Writing Coach provide in- and out-of-classroom support to teachers and paraprofessionals Differentiated professional development, designed to support new teachers, content-area teachers, Special Education teachers, etc. Mentoring systems in place for newly hired DOE teachers Weekly teacher team meetings Weekly professional development as per UFT contract 2018-19 CEP 43  Utilization of the Danielson Framework Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The following are utilized to assist pre-school children's transition to the elementary program: (1) Core Knowledge Literacy program is utilized in PreK and Kindergarten; (2) a series of parent events (i.e., school tours in Spring and Summer, as well as Summer and Fall workshops); (3) Pupil Personnel Team meetings include planning for SWDs; (4) Family Worker and Attendance Teacher facilitate record acquisition, registration, etc. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS/MS uses varied assessments to inform instruction, including assessment built into curricula, NYCDOE Periodic Assessments, NYS Assessments, MOSL assessments, and teacher created assessments. The process for choosing and/ or developing assessments consists of administrator and teacher team discussions to evaluate the assessment, determine the type of information it provides and its usefulness, and the dependability of the data it provides. Teachers and administrators came to an agreement on the best forms of assessment to meet the needs of the students. Teachers participate in professional development topics such as how to analyze data and how to use the data to inform instruction. In addition, through the Renewal School Program, mandated assessments are provided and utilized as diagnostic, summative, and formative data sources. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 44  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5: Rigorous Instruction part, 5B Supportive Environment, part 5B CollaborativeTeachers, part5B Effective School Leadership, part5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B Section 5: X x Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 296,999.00 Title II, Part A Federal 76,628.00 2018-19 CEP 45  Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,028,315.00 1Explanation/Background: x NA x CollaborativeTeachers, part5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B Section 5: Rigorous Instruction part, 5B Supportive Environment, part 5B CollaborativeTeachers, part5B Effective School Leadership, part5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B NA 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 2018-19 CEP 46  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 47  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 188 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/MS 188 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the lementary and Secondary Education Act. 2018-19 CEP 50  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 188 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 51  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the lementary and Secondary Education Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 52  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theEvery Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 53  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 55  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our school has well-established structures to ensure alignment of all stakeholders in working to achieve desired results. The CSD and key CBO partners regularly attend SLT meetings along with teachers and parents to determine school goals and programs. We coordinate the monthly CS Planning Team Meetings which include sub-committee chairs ( i.e., achievement, youth services, attendance, parent engagement, health and mental health ) school staff, parent representatives, CBO Supervisors, Parent Coordinator, etc. This team is responsible for implementation. The meeting begins with each committee chair reporting to the group as to progress and challenges they are facing. The group then addresses new issues and initiatives. They determine the timeline and responsibilities going forward. Plans are charted and distributed to the group. We use multiple sources of data to support instruction program, including NYS exams, benchmark assessments, mock testing, and classroom performance data. Based on these results strengths/weaknesses are determined./ Increased student learning is a result of shared decision-making to modify and/or initiate instructional practices. One decision was to initiate a 9th period “Academic Challenge” during extended day, focusing on Middle School ELA/Math. Students are re-grouped based on multiple measures of assessment to provide intensive, differentiated instruction by certified teachers and community educators. It now is also implemented across Grades 3-5 2018-19 CEP 56  NYS standardized ELA/MATH test results (Grades 3-8) show consistent improvement in meeting state standards. Over twice as many students have scored Level 3 over a three-year period. 2016 NYCDOE Quality “Snapshot” (Report Card) recognizes this achievement with rating of EXCELLENT (top 25th percentile) in both “Growth on Tests” and “Closing the Achievement Gap. “ Summary: ELA 2012-13: 6.4%; 2013-14: 9.3%; 2014-15: 10%; 2015-16: 15.6%. And for Math: 2012-13: 10.4%; 2013-14: 15.1%; 2014-15: 18.8%; 2015-16: 22.3% Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1) Reduce Chronic Absenteeism by 3% 2) By June 2018 have 95% of the students grades 3-5 actively participate in RULER 3) Engage at least 80% of parents into school based activities Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 1) ExpandEd (Educational Alliance): to strengthen academic support, talent development opportunities and implement SEL strategies for all students 2) Advantage after school PreK-2 (Educational Alliance): to strengthen academic support and provide developmentally appropriate early childhood activities 3) Counseling for students (Jewish Board); Social Workers (Educational Alliance: to continue providing intensive therapy, referrals and evaluations 4) Health Services for Students (Ryan-Nena): to extend hours of clinic 5) Supplementary Health and Wellness Services (ENACT): to provide trauma-informed drama therapy/ to develop life skills and provide health classes 6) Parent education, College and Career Counseling (BMCC): to reach more parents in sustained ESL and Literacy classes 7) Student Tutoring (Reading Partners): to train CBO staff in Reading Partner Strategies and offer support workshops for parents of students served 2018-19 CEP 57  Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population AmeriCorps Chronically Absent Students Scope of Service Success Mentors Educational Alliance School Population Expanded Learning Ryan-Nena School Population Health Reading Partners Targeted students based on ELA scores Expanded Learning SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2018, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for chronically absent from the previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous year. ExpandED Schools (formerly TASC): technical support; professional development; extended day funding Supplemental Extended Day programming and mentorships for Middle School girls in TH Following SEM Model. SEL Initiative Ryan-NENA Community Health Center: on-site nurse practitioner, and off-site full service medical out-patient clinic) on-site 1:1 reading tutoring during regular and extended-day Jewish Board Targeted students Mental health On-site counseling /social BMCC Parents/Students Family Engagement worker services; off-site psychiatric Adult Ed (on-site ESL, off-site GED, college prep); on-site family literacy 2018-19 CEP 58  NYPD MS girls group identified through PPT meetings Educational and mentoring services On-site mentoring, off-site educational trips New York Cares Student Population Family Engagement and Expanded Education Urban Family Services Center/Henry Street Settlement Identified Students at risk of chronic absenteeism Attendance Support Studio In A School School Population Youth Services 30+ weekly volunteers (Saturday sports & recreation program, enrichment offerings); school beautification; liaison with corporate special event sponsors and programs Interventions/Counseling for students that reside in temporary housing. 1. Temporary Housing Shelter adjacent to the school. Talent Development and Visual Arts Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sonyc DYCD; Community Schools Funding; ExpandED Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2018-19 CEP 59  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. 188 in collaboration with the lead CBO Educational Alliance has hired a Community School Director. The Director will assist administration in the implementation of community school's four main pillars while conducting evidence based assessment tools to track progress and success of students through their various partnerships. 2.The school supports students with issues of poverty, homelessness, chronic absenteeism and language barriers. Although providing enrichment and wrap-around services, the school identified the need for Social Emotional Learning aligned with supports for students. The school team explored program options and selected RULER from Yale University and CREW from the Morningside Center for Social Responsibility. The team developed a three tiered plan to support students in class, in small groups and individually. A weekly meeting is set up where a team consisting of Social Workers, Parent Coordinator, Principal, Psychologist, Guidance Counselors and other relevant staff meet to review students. In this meeting the team will go over referrals, recommend services, and construct a plan to identify as well as meet the needs of our students. 3.Monthly Meetings will be held on the third Thursday of the month at 10:00am to: review and refine strategic plan, identify challenges and solutions, assess the effectiveness of resources , identify new partners and resources and assess effectiveness of academic support. Teachers, counselors and other school staff will present issues and work with CBO planning team. ASPIRE SURVEY We will continue identifying resources and assets and cataloguing them on the 188 aspire survey. Staff members will access the survey online to identify resources and support that they can draw upon to enrich classroom instruction. 4.PPT meetings will occur every Thursday at 10:45am. A team consisting of those identified roles meet to review goals, assessments, successes, along with strategic planning to further goals. The CSD will generate relevant information pulled from the Data Sorter to use during meetings. All relevant staff will have been trained in specified Data Tools. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1) ExpandEd (Educational Alliance): to strengthen academic support,talent development opportunities and implement SEL strategies for all students 2) Advantage after school PreK-2 (Educational Alliance): to strengthen academic support and provide developmentally appropriate early childhood activities 2018-19 CEP 60  3) Counseling for students (Jewish Board): to continue providing intensive therapy, referrals and evaluations 4) Health Services for Students (Ryan-Nena): to extend hours of clinic 5) Supplementary Health and Wellness Services (CANY): to provide trauma-informed drama therapy/ to develop life skills and provide health classes 6) Parent education, College and Career Counseling (BMCC): to reach more parents in sustained ESL and Literacy classes 7) Student Tutoring (Reading Partners): to train CBO staff in Reading Partner Strategies and offer support workshops for parents of students served Community School Team: School Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director (Ed Alliance), After School/ExpandEd Director (Ed Alliance), Associate Assistant (Ed Alliance), Parent Coordinator, PTA President and Community Partners. CS Attendance Team strategically uses the New Visions Student Data Sorter to drive weekly attendance meetings/provide tactical interventions using NYCDOE’s “Three Tiered/Intervention Model to strategically combat chronic absence (Tier 1-Attendance 90% or above; Tier 2-Attendance 80-90%, Tier 3-Attendance below 80) Data Sorter allows partners to identify chronically absent students and provide interventions to improve overall attendance. The school targets and assigns community-based services align to a student’s specific need. Tier 3 students work closely with our Attendance Case Worker and Guidance Counselor. Tier 2 Students (in temporary housing and/or having decreased attendance from the previous month) work with AmeriCorps/Success Mentor and MSW Intern. Our full team SLT supports Tier 1 students to recognize good and improved attendance. The data allows us to acknowledge attendance goals and expectations and to establish an engaging and fun school climate for children. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 CEP 61  The resources needed to run a successful completetion of goals are the following: Teaching specialist and additional instruction time; Extended hour for Test Prep; Saturday enrichment and extended hours including but not limited to Extended Day/Afterschool; Vacation days as schedule adjustment. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All expected outcomes listed in the above addendum will be completed by June 30th 2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 62  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: PS/MS 188 M will conduct an after-school instructional program to enrich second language acquisition for 30 ELLs in third through seventh grade. The activities will be geared to foment and enhance vocabulary development, reading comprehension, writing, and speaking skills through social studies. To address the needs of students at PS 188 the program is targeted to students with entering and emerging language proficiency and newcomers to the United States. Advanced students are also included in the program to create heterogeneous grouping and to provide positive language models for beginning students. The program is designed to incorporate all four language modalities to prepare students for success in core academic areas. We chose to focus our program on exploring the communities of New York City since many of our students are new to the city and are only just beginning to learn about the rich culture and diversity New York has to offer. We believe that the topic of New York City Communities will be engaging to students and allow for hands-on exploration and rich language development opportunities. Schedule and Duration: The program will meet for 20 weeks on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays for 1 hour each day from 7:00 AM - 8:00 AM for a total of 60 hours. The program will run from November through May. Grade levels: Grades 3-8, about 5 ELLs from each grade level. 3rd/4th Grade ELLs will be in group 1 (Wednesday /Thursday) 5th Grade ELLs will be in group 2 (Tuesdays only) 6/7th Grade ELLs will be in group 3 (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday) Subgroups: 6 SWD's, 1 SIFE, 14 Newcomer ELLs (0-3 Years), 12 Developing ELLs (3-6 Years), 2 ELLs (Long-Term) (Some ELLs fall into more than one category) ELLs at many different levels will be invited to participate in the program, however, we are targeting newcomer ELLs (0-3 years) who can benefit from additional instruction and being introduced to New York City. It is important to note that the majority of our ELLs at PS/MS 188 fall into the newcomer category with 0-3 Years of service. Language of Instruction The program will be conducted in English with native language support provided through translations, bilingual dictionaries, and native language books. Number and Types of Certified Teachers 2018-19 CEP 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Two certified ESL teachers will oversee the program. Types of Materials: Engaging literature will be used as read-alouds each day during the program. The thematic classroom library will be purchased for $250.00 at a cost to Title III. Students will be using various materials to assemble their projects about the communities we discuss. Since the New York State Common Core standards emphasize technological literacy and research skills, students will have access to the Internet to complete online research of the communities we discuss during the program. A Smart Board, already in the classroom, will allow the teachers to model effective research practices. (At no-cost to Title III) After modeling, students will simultaneously use the desktop computers, as appropriate for grade level, during guided practice to develop academic research habits. Marble notebooks, folders (at cost to Title III) pencils, glue sticks, and markers will be provided for the students to take notes, organize handouts, and create projects. English dictionaries will be used to support vocabulary development and word study while bilingual dictionaries will be used to provide students with native language support. Additional books will be purchased (Guided Reading Level Packs) to support our newcomer ELLs who may need extra reading and vocabulary instruction. This will be at a cost to Title III of $2,014.32. One of the two ENL teachers will spend 20 minutes of the Title III program to teach a guided reading lesson to our newcomer group. The program includes books that students can take home to share with families. Type of Program/Activities: Social Studies will set the stage for the implementation and development of a theme, Communities Around the World and New York City. The rationale behind this selection is connected to the notion that it is important for ELLs and their families to become acquainted with the community where they live--New York City-- and the diverse cultures that exist in this large multi-ethnic metropolis. The main goal of this enrichment program is to support second language acquisition among our ELL students through activities that will include read alouds, shared reading, independent reading, songs from around the world, writing in the content area, and oral presentations as a final project. The specific skills that students will be developing are: summarizing, understanding non-fiction as a genre, identifying facts and opinions, writing captions and paragraphs. Two ENL certified teachers will be in charge of instruction. We will use an arts approach to guide students in creating a project of their choice where they will collect information about each community we read about and discuss in books. Students can choose between making a poster, brochure, power-point presentation, tri-fold, or book. If a student has a different idea for their project they may present that to the teachers for consideration. The visual arts component acknowledges students’ diverse learning styles, self-identity, social cognition, and expression. Second language acquisition skills are going to be emphasized through the use of descriptive language, specific vocabulary related to art, asking relevant questions, critiquing work, sharing ideas and opinions. Students will also be learning songs from around the world to help develop their oral language skills and oral fluency. Students will have the opportunity to interview community members to practice oral questioning skills as part of their ongoing project. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Since some of our newcomers may be struggling with English and still developing the emergent English reading, writing, and vocabulary necessary to complete their projects, additional support will be provided for these students in the form of guided reading. Guided reading is part of a balanced literacy approach and aligns nicely with the Teacher's College workshop model used during the school day. One ENL teacher will work with a group of entering/emerging ELLs for 20 minutes each session on this reading and writing program. In January, we will invite parents to a mid-way point celebration where students will orally present the topic they are choosing to research in-depth for their final project. Students will rehearse their presentations before the event and parents will have a chance to ask students questions to foster an environment of rich discussion and collaboration. Food will be provided to parents as an incentive to attend and as a way of creating a familial environment in our ELL community. The food for the mid-way celebration and the culminating celebration (see below) will be at a cost to Title III of $300. As previously mentioned, the program will be serving a total of 30 students in grades 3 through 7 meeting weekday mornings 7:00 am to 8:00 am starting in mid-November 2016 to mid-May 2017. We will utilize books such as Stringbean’s Trip to the Shining Sea by Vera Williams, What is A Community? By Bobbie Kalman, The Story of the Statue of Liberty by Betsy & Giulio Maestro, New York City by Deborah Kent, Flying over Brooklyn by Myron Uhlberg, Next Stop Grand Central by Bobbie Kalman, You Can’t Take a Balloon Into The Metropolitan Museum by Jacqueline Preiss Weitzman, among other possible titles that will be discussed throughout the term of the program. We will also purchase materials to support the projects students will make. This includes materials for making posters, tri-folds, brochures, and books. In April, a field trip will be planned where students and teachers take a sight-seeing trip of New York City. During this time students and teachers will document their experience and take photos of communities and landmarks they have been learning about since November. Parents will be invited to this event and participate in a shared drawing and writing response about one of the landmarks we see during the trip. We do expect a cost of $934.75 to Title III to cover the price of the trip for all participants. The students will have multiple weeks to assemble their projects, write text to accompany their project and rehearse a presentation that will be delivered during a culminating activity. Parents will be invited to watch students present their project during a culminating "share-fair." Parents will be provided food at a cost to Title III of $300 (this amount includes food for all parent activities) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: ENL Professional Development at PS/MS188M will be structured around a study group to be held weekly to discuss and reflect upon specific needs of the ELL population and how to better 2018-19 CEP 66  Part C: Professional Development implement co-teaching for ELLs. The two participants will be looking at the strategies to better service students in the development of L2 through the reading and discussion of the book "Common Core for the Not So Common Learner, Grades K-5 English Language Arts Strategies" by Andrea Honigsfeld and Maria G. Dove. The study group will meet for five sessions for two hours each week. Other opportunities for professional development include monthly lunch-and-learn sessions held for 45 minutes during lunchtime. The proposed schedule and topic list is below: Professional Development Timeline: The tentative schedule for eight monthly workshops is below and includes training time to show teachers how to provide scaffolding for ELL's in the classroom. November -- Myths and Misconceptions About Second Language Learning: What Every Teacher Needs to Unlearn December -- Understanding and Using Language Proficiency Rubrics for ELLs, Google Doc Resources, and the PS188 Lending Library January -- ELL Scaffolding Ideas for the Writer's Workshop February -- ELL Scaffolding Ideas for Reader's Workshop March -- Vocabulary Routines and Strategies for ELLs part 1 April -- Vocabulary Routines and Strategies for ELLs part 2 May -- Thematic Units and Center Activities to Meet the Needs of ELLs June -- How the NYSESLAT and other assessments help us plan for instruction These meetings include articulation and reflection meetings Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to a mid-way celebration in January where they will watch their children give short presentations about the topics they have chosen to research and will have a chance to ask questions to their children (in English or their home language). Translators will be available. Parents will be invited to attend the April field-trip with students and teachers. The field trip, as previously mentioned, involves a sightseeing tour of Manhattan where students and parents can 2018-19 CEP 67  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities see and take photos of the many landmarks and neighborhoods we have been learning about since November. The parents who attend will participate in a short drawing and writing response activity about one of the sights they saw during the trip. This activity will focus on asking and answering 5'w questions (who, what, where, when, why) about the sight. After the activity, the parents will be encouraged to use the 5w's as a comprehension tool at home with their children. They can ask their children questions after reading at home as one way to support their children's reading comprehension. This activity will create a partnership between parents and students that will help parents understand how they can help their children learn English even if they themselves are non-English speakers. Parents will also be invited to the culminating presentation during the last session of the Title III program. Parents will be sent notifications in their native language. Translators will be available to answer parent questions and explain the schedule of events. Parents will be reminded of upcoming workshops at our school and Saturday programs. The parent coordinator offers workshops each month and opportunities for parents to participate in various Saturday programs including a cooking class. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8,491  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff NA $2,350.38 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Instructional Time Per session 2 teachers X 3/week x 20 weeks x 60.65=7,278 per-session 2 teachers x2 hrs a week x 5weeks x 60.65=1,213 NA Staples twin pocket portfolios $3.99 10/pk x 5 =$19.95 Thematic Classroom Library: Communities in New York and Around the World 1 x 250 = $250 Trifolds: 20 x $3.29 = $65.80 Guided Reading Level Packs Grade 1 (Levels A - I) 9780545912891 $936.31 2018-19 CEP 68 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Grade 2 ( Levels E-N) 9780545912891 $1,078.32 NA Sightseeing Bus Tour 30 children x $31.25 = $937.50 6 adults x 44.25 = $265.50 Food for parents during mid-way point and culminating activity 12344.38 Educational Software (Object Code 199) NA Travel Other TOTAL $1203.00 $300.00 12,344.38 2018-19 CEP 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name PS/MS 188 The Island School Borough Manhattan School Number 188 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Suany Ramos Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ian Gold/Rebecca Baez Teacher/Subject Area Silvia Elsayed/Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Dilifer Inoa/Dual Language Related-Service Provider Enit Santiago Superintendent Daniela Phillips Assistant Principal Rosa Almonte Coach School Counselor Ana Perez Parent Marleny Peralta Parent Coordinator Mirta Rosales Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 70  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 485 Total number of ELLs 69 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.23% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 4 K 1 Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs at PS 188 we use formal and informal assessments. The formal assessments we use are Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) Running Records. Teachers also use supplemental running records to evaluate students’ reading levels. Classroom teachers in grades K-2 are now using assessments as part of the Core Knowledge Language Arts Curriculum (CKLA) to provide both baseline data and ongoing information about student progress. The data provided from the CKLA program is shared with ENL teachers who use additional CKLA assessment and remediation strategies as needed. While we are transitioning to TCRWP for ELA instruction, more assessments from this program will be used. In 2017-2018, TCRWP running records are primarily used. 2018-19 CEP 71  The ENL teacher uses CKLA assessments to determine early literacy skills. These assessments place students in the CKLA program based on level. The assessments include word identification, word reading, letter/sound identification, comprehension screening, and running records. Currently we implement the K, 1, and 2 levels of the program. Additionally, students in 2nd through 5th grade who are determined to be two years or more below grade-level in reading are assessed on-line through the Mindplay program. These students are assessed for comprehension, fluency, and phonemic awareness and then provided instructional interventions using the Mindplay software. On early literacy assessments ELLs generally score below grade level due to their limited vocabulary in English and their limited schooling prior to entering Kindergarten and/or the United States. Teachers use the information collected from all assessments to carefully understand the needs of our ELLs in order to better assist them in the classroom. The ENL teacher combines information provided by classroom teachers, the CKLA assessments, and the Mindplay computer assessment to create an intake summary describing the various strengths and weaknesses of each student’s early literacy skills. This information is stored in an assessment binder and referred to while planning for instruction. Each student’s assessment profile is updated as new information becomes available from classroom teachers, the ENL teacher, and standardized test scores. Assessments done throughout the year can be used to analyze student progress over time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Classroom teacher assess all students using the TCRWP running records (which are also NYC MOSL aligned) during the first two months of school. Paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, and other support staff assist with this effort. Students are also assessed mid-year and end-of-year with TCRWP running records. Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) assessments are ongoing throughout the year and given both in the classroom and by ENL teachers in grades K-2. Other teacher made assessments are used throughout the year. These include reading comprehension passages with multiple choice questions and writing tasks. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As stated in question 1, we use the TCRWP running records as a baseline. This is also used as our NYC MOSL baseline data. This ensures there is data for each student and that students are assessed at least three times each year. ENL teachers use baseline reading comprehension assessments and writing assessments along with CKLA K-2 early literacy assessments. These K-2 assessments include sound/symbol knowledge, sound blending, word reading, word identification, and basic comprehension skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once data is gathered, students are grouped into tiers. Teachers meet during professional development time on Mondays to create differentiated instructional plans for each student group. TCRWP allows for the majority of the Reader's and Writer's workshop to provide targeted one-on-one and small group conferencing. During this time teachers differentiate instruction to target student needs. Tier III interventions include, but are not limited to, scaffolded conferences that re-teach concepts from earlier instruction, targeted interventions based on unit assessment and remediation guides, computer guided support (Raz-Kids, Mindplay), small group work targeted to student needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school follows the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework to guide instruction. We follow the RTI recommended implementation of universal screening, strong core instruction, intensive tailored instruction, and progress monitoring. To guide instruction, ENL and general education teachers analyze scores from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and ELA exams. Teachers also look closely at the ELL Periodic Assessment and special needs of students with disabilities as outlined in IEP's. While this data informs initial grouping and gives teachers an early understanding of student ability and need, ongoing assessments are given to monitor student progress. Throughout the year teachers rely on student classwork, IRLA scores, CKLA assessments, and assessments from the Expeditionary Learning curriculum to guide instruction. This instruction is aligned to the RTI model since it allows teachers to provide strong core instruction and intensive tailored instruction to students in tiers 2 and 3. 2018-19 CEP 72  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESITELL, NYSESLAT and the EDAT all inform our ELL programs. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data reveal a pattern across proficiency and grade levels. When analyzing the 2017 NYSESLAT results we see that most students are in the expanding category (26), then transitioning (21), then emerging (15), followed by entering (7), and finally commanding (1). This tells us that we have students distributed across varying levels of proficiency. Almost all of the students who scored at the entering and emerging levels are newcomer ELLs. Many of our students who have scored at the expanding level are developing ELLS (4-6 years of service) or long-term ELLs. All three of the long-term ELLs in our school are students with learning disabilities. The speaking and listening scores demonstrate that students tend to score better in those two modalities. Interestingly, the reading and writing modality provides us with data that looks very different. Proficiency levels are more evenly distributed in reading and writing with fewer students reaching a commanding level. Based on this data we can clearly see that our students' strengths are in listening and speaking while their weakness is in reading and writing. We can also see that students who struggle the most to attain commanding NYSESLAT scores are newcomers and students with learning disabilities. We use the EDAT to look closely at how students are scoring by modality level. The EDAT tells us information individualized for each student. ENL teachers make notes based on which modality students are close to gaining proficiency in and which modalities students struggle with. This information is recorded and used to guide instruction throughout the year. The success of PS 188’s programs for ELLs is evaluated based on students' NYSESLAT scores (focusing on their improvement in each modality; Reading/Writing and Speaking/Listening), formal and informal assessments conducted by the ENL teacher and their classroom teacher, and communication with classroom teachers. The AMAO's are also analyzed to determine how successful the ENL program has been. The NYSESLAT data is analyzed to see which students have moved one level, which students remained at the same language proficiency level, and which students decreased in a language proficiency level. ENL and dual language teachers also look at anecdotal information from teachers and analysis of student work and progress on a case by case basis. This information is analyzed for trends to determine in which areas the ENL program has been successful and which areas need to be strengthened for the following year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Early in the year all teachers receive scores of NYSESLAT scores. During Monday professional development ENL teachers meet with grade level teams to discuss individual ENL student needs based on the data gather. Teachers are informed during PD that all teachers are teachers of ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. The freestanding ENL program at PS/MS 188 is organized using an integrated and standalone model. Students are placed in heterogeneous classes along with non-ENL students allowing for strong social interaction and development of L2 language skills. From these classes students are grouped into ENL pull-out groups that are homogenous proficiency levels and bridge two grades. For example, one ENL group may be fourth and fifth grade “Entering/Emerging” while another pull-out group might be second and third grade “Expanding”. The instructional units provided to these groups are aligned with CR Part 154. Depending on scheduling needs, some classes will have the ENL teacher push-in. During this time, the ENL teacher will push-in to provide integrated ENL services for those 2018-19 CEP 73  students by co-teaching with the general education or content area teacher. Stand-alone ENL services are provided using research based ENL strategies. Integrated ENL services are provided by working closely with classroom teachers to develop and integrated Common Core Curriculum that supports ELLs in the content areas. Since our school uses the CKLA and Expeditionary Learning curriculum for ELA which is highly integrated with science and social studies, our ENL teachers focus on these content areas. Specific stand-alone ENL strategies used include: Natural Language Approach, Language Experience Approach, Cooperative Learning, TPR (Total Physical Response) and QTEL Scaffolding Strategies. Specific integrated ENL strategies used include: co-teaching, QTEL scaffolding, explicit vocabulary instruction, sentence frames, and content-related cognates. TPR and other ENL strategies allow children who may have emergent English skills to express themselves using their body and by repeating English language words (this strategy includes chanting, echo reading, and choral reading). By using the body to connect with language, and by using choral reading strategies, children can make connections to an unfamiliar language and begin to internalize word meaning and word pronunciation. Building on best practices in ENL pedagogy, project-based learning and the arts are infused within instruction to enhance engagement and understanding, and as an entry point to acquiring “academic” language. Our school believes that it is crucial for our English Language Learners to enter project-based learning activities through their strengths (e.g., visual arts, dance, music, interpersonal, linguistic, etc.) thus fostering engagement, confidence and self-esteem. Specific ENL instructional materials used include materials that are used in conjunction with grade appropriate curriculum (e.g., English Now, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT) ELL students have full access to technology, with increasing attention to use of software to differentiate instruction, and multi-media software to facilitate product development. PS/MS 188’s ENL curricula are fully aligned with NYS ENL standards. The school’s ENL Coordinator, in collaboration with school administration, facilitates program development and implementation (identification and placement of ENL/Bilingual certified teachers, scheduling, content, materials, etc.). b. TBE program. If applicable. b. At this time PS/IS 188 does not offer a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. c. Our dual language program is currently in Pre-Kindergarten to fourth grade. EPs and ELLs are integrated for the entire instructional day and students are grouped heterogeneously. The self-contained 50/50 dual language model is used. Language is separated using the 50/50 model each day. This time is divided between morning and afternoon. For example, Monday may be Spanish in the morning and English in the afternoon. Tuesday would then be reversed with English in the morning and Spanish in the afternoon. The dual language teachers will determine if students may benefit from a different schedule three months after the start of the year. If students are determined to be progressing in both languages then the model may change so that instruction on each day of the week is in one language alternating every other day. For example, Monday may be Spanish all day, then Tuesday may be English. This is left at the discretion of the dual language teacher after assessing the needs of her class. The stand-alone and integrated ENL services are provided to our dual language students throughout the day in the self-contained environment using the following curriculum. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages at the same time (simultaneous). The Estrellita program is used for teaching Spanish and the Core Knowledge program is used for teaching English, Social Studies, and some Science. Additionally, the Core Knowledge Language Arts program is supplemented with Spanish books and materials so that students will learn about the same thematic topic simultaneously in Spanish and English. For example, one Core Knowledge unit is about seasons and weather. Students will participate in the read aloud in English on Monday and on Tuesday listen to a related but different read aloud in Spanish that will build on their knowledge. The 100 Book Challenge program is used in English and Spanish with corresponding assessments to determine independent reading levels. The IRLA is the English assessment and the ENIL is the Spanish assessment. Go Math is used for the integrated ENL math component. Additional ENL integrated science instruction is provided by units that coordinate with the CKLA curriculum. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 74  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? a. The organization of our staff is designed in order to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to CR154, the ENL teacher creates groups of students combined by grade level and language proficiency. The stand-alone classroom is made up of these bridge groups (example: 4/5 Entering/Emerging Group or 6/7 Expanding Group). ELA content is taught through ENL methodologies and techniques. When one general education classroom has a large number of ELL’s, a push-in or integrated ENL program is implemented whereby the ENL teacher provides in-class ENL support for these students. In order to ensure all students receive mandated services, students may receive both push-in and pull-out services. The K-5 ENL teacher is dually certified in ENL and Common Branch so can provide integrated ENL services when appropriate. The integrated ENL focuses on thematic ELA units that are closely integrated with social studies and science. Our school uses CKLA and Expeditionary learning for the ELA instruction. These two programs also teach science and social studies which is the focus of our integrated ENL. The decision of which content areas to integrate is based on what classroom teachers are planning throughout the year. The goal is to balance content area. In 6-8th grade, the ENL teacher provides some integrated ENL services in the content area of science. All “entering” ELL’s receive 2 units of study per week (350 minutes) of ENL instructional time. These include 1 unit (180 min.) of stand-alone ENL taught by a K-12 certified ENL teacher. They also receive 1 unit of study of integrated ENL. In K-5 this is taught by a dually certified K-12 and Common Branch teacher but in 6-8, a co-teaching model is used whereby an ENL teacher is working alongside a content area teacher. All “emerging” ELL’s also receive 2 units of study (360 minutes) per week. These minutes include .5 units (90 min) of stand-alone ENL and 1 unit (180 min.) of integrated ENL. The remaining .5 unit of study will be taught either stand-alone or integrated depending on the needs of the particular group of students. All “transitioning” ELL’s will receive 1 unit of study per week. These minutes include .5 units of study as integrated ENL and .5 units of study either as integrated or stand-alone ENL depending on the needs of the particular group of “transitioning” students. All “Expanding” ELL’s will receive 1 unit of integrated ENL. All “commanding” ELL’s will receive .5 units of integrated ENL. In all grades, stand-alone ENL will be taught by a certified K-12 ENL teacher. In grades K-5 integrated ENL will be taught by a dually certified K-5 and Common Branch teacher. In grades 6-8, integrated ENL will be taught using a co-teaching model with one certified ENL teacher working alongside a certified content area teacher. Per CR 154 native language support is provided to these students through bilingual dictionaries, translations, and a native-language library of literature. Dual Language Program The dual language program includes 45 minutes of home language arts instruction each day. ENL is taught by the bilingual teacher using an integrated model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. PS 188 implements a common core aligned English Language Arts program throughout all grades. The Core Knowledge Language Arts program is used in grades K-2, the Expeditionary Learning program in grades 3-8. This year grades K-8 are implementing the TCRWP Writer's Workshop model and are beginning to implement the Reader's Workshop model. This will be a transitional time as teachers are being trained in the new models and the program is being implemented throughout the year. Meanwhile, elements of the previous curriculum will still be incorporated into instruction. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers to create a curriculum that supplements and supports the Common Core aligned curriculum. For example, while in the classroom students may be learning about nursery rhymes and fables in the general classroom, students will be learning a similar topic with ENL modifications in the pull-out classroom. The ENL teacher uses reading level data provided by classroom teachers to create instruction tailored to individual student levels. In Grades K-5, GO math is utilized. Connected Math is used in Grades 6-8. Grades 6-8 ELL Curricula in Science and Social Studies are fully aligned with NYS learning standards. The K-5 Social Studies curricula infuse performing arts and visual arts through teaching artist residencies. ELL students participate fully in all supplemental programs which include music, and LEAP. Additional supplemental programs, specifically designed for ENL students include a 14-week arts-infused curricula focusing on a cultural awareness social studies program infused with language development activities and project based learning. To support reading foundational skills, ENL students who are struggling with decoding and fluency use Mindplay software. Modifications to help ELLs within these programs include use of turn and talk, oral language development protocols, group 2018-19 CEP 75  work, graphic organizers, explicit vocabulary instruction, scaffolded close reading strategies, small group instruction, translations into native language, choral reading, echo reading, syntax awareness activities, multiple word meaning activities, and writing journals. Dual Language Program The dual language program follows the CKLA curriculum for Kindgergarten through Second Grade for English language arts. The listening and learning units are adapted to be used in both languages, Spanish and English, using a simultaneous model. For Spanish native language arts Estrellita is used in Pre-K and Kindergarten. Go Math has a Spanish component that is used to teach math in English and Spanish in the dual language classes. Social studies and science are closely integrated with the CKLA curriculum and supplemented as needed. The listening and learning strand of CKLA includes thematic units that are closely integrated to social studies and science. For example, one unit may focus on Native Americans and another unit on the life cycle of a butterfly. These units are taught both in English and Spanish and supplemented with social studies and content books. The English curriculum includes read-alouds, hand-outs, videos, hands-on activities and assessments. Teachers are adapting this curriculum for the target language by using Spanish language read-alouds, activities, hand-outs, and assessments that are closely aligned but different than the English language materials. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. Our ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language so that classroom teachers and the ENL teacher are better able to meet the needs of our ELLs. Upon initial enrollment an informal interview is conducted in the child’s native language to evaluate basic conversational skills. After students complete the NYSITELL a Spanish Lab is administered to Spanish speaking students who do not score commanding on the NYSITELL. This allows the classroom teachers, dual language teachers, and ENL teachers to gauge what level the students are at academically in their native language. PS/MS 188 has a diverse staff that speak many of our students' home languages. ENL teachers often reach out to teachers to hold conversations with our ENL students in their home languages and then report how students are comprehending. Newcomer ENL students are often given texts in their home language to use and are encouraged to write in their home language to respond to reading. In the dual language program several home language assessments are used at the beginning and throughout the year. These assessments include Estrellita for phonics and phonemic awareness, 100 Book Challenge Spanish for independent reading levels, Go Math for mathematic proficiency, and pre and post unit assessments aligned to the ELA, social studies, and science CKLA curriculum. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Active planning is taking place to ensure appropriate strategy work and differentiation for the various subgroups of ELLS in our school community. The plan for SIFE is to receive academic intervention services in reading, writing, and math. Once identified, SIFE are assessed using the LENS assessment. SIFE students who enter our community at a beginning English proficiency level are grouped with newcomers and receive the instruction and support provided below. SIFE students who have been at PS 188 for 2 or more years continue to receive intervention services as needed in addition to support with study skills, test-taking, and developing habits of a succesful student. Since many of our SIFE students require reading foundational support, we have implemented the Mindplay computer program. This allows teachers to differentiate and provide SIFE with opportunities to strengthen crucial early literacy skills. SIFE are also supported before and after-school. During small group instruction before school SIFE can be taught early literacy skills at a slow and consistent pace to help them progress. SIFE are also supported socio-emotionally at PS/IS 188. All SIFE are invited to participate in before school and after school extra-curricular activity. Teachers are very aware of understanding the various interests of our SIFE and allowing them to express these interests both in the academic setting and after-school. b. Newcomers to our community are taught using various ENL strategies and methods. They are paired with other students who speak the same home language so they can receive support when following routines and directions. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 76  curriculum utilizes thematic units, academic language, interactive read alouds, hands-on activies, interactive whiteboard lessons, and is based on a communicative approach. ENL teachers use writing lessons that are based on writing from pictures to expand newcomer vocabulary and move from Tier 1, everday words, to tier II and tier III vocabulary. Newcomers, especially those in grades 6-8 sometimes have strong L1 proficiency. The ENL teacher designs lessons that create opportunities for these students to transfer their native language knowledge into their L2. Because NCLB now requires that ELLs will be taking the ELA exam after one year, we will be providing them with explicit test taking strategies and continue to align instruction with the ELA curriculum. c. Our program pays close attention to developing ELL’s who are receiving ENL services in the range of 4-6 years. It is vital that appropriate supports are provided for these students to ensure they are making adequate yearly progress and, for those with disabilities, yearly IEP goals are being met. First, the ENL teacher uses a curriculum aligned to Common Core Standards and thematic units that are used in the student’s home classrooms. This ensures students are receiving instruction that is based on academic concepts and language. Secondly, the ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and paraprofessionals work together to target individual student needs and address these in varying ways throughout the school day. These may include referring students to the Reading Partners one-on-one reading program, using Raz-Kids computer listening and reading stations with students, providing individual support during class time to explain concepts or guided practice, and referring students to the AIS program. Additionally, our students and their families are offered small group and/or individual intervention through counseling. d. Long-term ELLs are another group that must receive appropriate differentiated instruction. The first step in targeting this group of ELLs is looking at assessment data closely to understand why they are still classified as ELLs. This means examining NYSESLAT scores, informal assessments, and having discussions with teachers and service providers to pinpoint student needs. Instruction is truly tailored to student’s individual needs. While some students may need extensive vocabulary support and little else, other students may still be struggling with decoding skills and require reading intervention services. PS 188 has several programs in place to target whichever skill such students may need. These programs include a partnership with Reading Partners, extended day tutoring, computer assisted learning programs such as Reading A-Z, IXL Math, Compass Learning and Time to Know. CTT classrooms, an AIS teacher, and counseling services are also a mainstay of instruction for long-term ELLs at PS 188. This is in addition to small group guided reading, vocabulary development, project-based learning, and writing workshop that the ENL teacher provides during the pull-out program. Long-term students also have access to the Title III supplementary program for ELLs which is designed specifically to differentiate for students struggling in reading and writing. e. Former ELL’s are provided support that is integrated with ELA. These ELL’s are capable of completing work in their ELA, science, and social studies classrooms but may need extra support with academic vocabulary, writing grammatical essays, or reading academically rigorous texts. ELL's are provided ENL support that targets these specific areas or other areas these students may struggle with. The ENL teachers work closely with all content teachers to make sure these ELLs receive additional support in the classroom and are provided with modifications, when appropriate. This may include the use of bilingual dictionaries, extra-time to study vocabulary, and extra time given during assessments. When pulled-out, the ENL teacher helps these students with strategies for doing well in their class. This may include teaching them how to keep a vocabulary notebook and reviewing words from a weekly reading. It may also include helping them to organize an essay about a book they have been reading in ELA or science class. These students are given additional time on qualifying state assessments as outlined in CR Part 154. ELL's who have tested at a commanding level on the NYSESLAT are also invited to Title III programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teachers and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs use instructional strategies and grade-level materials to provide students with access to academic content and guide students in accelerating English language development. Teachers of ELL-SWDs follow students’ IEPs in regard to academic and language goals for individual students and mandated services that these students are obligated to receive. These outside services such as SETTS, Speech, and ENL, provide students with additional support. Classroom teachers and service providers discuss with one another the student’s progress and continued needs. Classrooms with SWDs are CTT classes where classroom teachers provide differentiated instruction in the classroom to target specific needs and IEP goals of SWDs. Other programs that target these students include Reading Partners, Compass Learning, IXL, Time to Know, Raz Kids, and Mindplay. The ENL teachers makes special effort to collaborate with the classroom teachers to modify tasks and plan appropriate scaffolds. To facilitate collaboration the ENL teacher will be using a new collaborative Google Doc where classroom teachers can input monthly instructional needs for students. Monthly informal “luncheons” will 2018-19 CEP 77  also be held to facilitate ongoing collaboration and communication about student needs. The ENL teachers also attends PPT meetings that involve ELLs to ensure the needs of these students are taken into consideration during the planning process. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, PS 188 offers service providers to meet at the beginning of the school year to plan out a schedule. Some of our ELL-SWDs receive more than one service, thus it is important that all service providers meet to discuss which students will be pulled-out on what days and what times. This allows all service providers to rearrange scheduling in order to ensure that one particular student is not pulled out of class too often in one day or at conflicting times. Classroom teachers are also consulted to ensure students are not missing too much of one content area. Additionally, since the ENL teacher attends PPT meetings which involve ELLs this ensures the special needs of ELLs are taken into consideration during the initial placement and planning process for ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers a range of targeted intervention programs in English for ELLs in ELA, math, and science focusing on ELLs at risk for not attaining one year of value added growth. Targeted intervention services are given to our 4-6 year ELLs. These services include extended day, working with in-class volunteers through the America Reads Program at NYU, and one-on-one reading intervention through a partnership with Reading Partners for K-3 students. Additionally, these students are provided with computer assisted learning programs such as RazKids, IXL Math, and Mindplay. These students also are invited to attend the Title III supplementary program which is designed to target reading and writing skills for struggling students. Additionally, all teachers log academic intervention services weekly in digital tracking sheets based on a schedule of three tiers. Tier one is grade level and above which requires guided reading at least once each week. Tier two is below grade level and requires guided reading at least twice each week. Tier three is more than a year below grade level and requires guided reading at least three times per week and one-on-one support. Our newcomer and SIFE subgroups are provided in-class intervention with help from the ENL teachers. The ENL teachers work closely with classroom teachers to develop modifications for in-class assignments and activities. For example, while the majority of students may be doing independent reading, a newcomer ELL might be at a listening station. SIFE and newcomer students use the Mindplay software program for reading foundational skills intervention. The long-term ELLs fall in grades 6-8 where the ENL teacher uses a push-in program model so they may receive modifications to class-work without missing crucial content area. The ENL teacher uses a variety of methods which include graphic organizer, vocabulary strategies, translations, individual bilingual word walls, writing journals, and sentence frames. Counseling, after-school programs, and weekend enrichment programs are also available to all at-risk students. Interventions for ELLs in math include small group instruction, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, assessment and remediation lessons, differentiated instruction for Tier two and three students, and the IXL computer program. Interventions for ELLs in social studies include small group instruction, home language cognates, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and differentiated instruction for Tier two and Tier three students. In lower grades we offer partner arts organizations like the LEAP program who integrate social studies and science with ELA to provide interventions for students with disabilities and our Tier three students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017-2018 school year, PS/MS 188 is beginning to implement the TCRWP Reader's and Writer's workshop. This model allows for teachers to easily differentiate lessons since the bulk of the instructional period is devoted to individual student conferences and small group conferencing. The ENL teachers will be working to develop different ways to scaffold the curriculum and tools they can provide teachers and students during conferencing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 78  ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. All students, including ELLs at PS 188 participate in the following curricular program: K-2 classes follow the Core Knowledge Curriculum and 3-8 classes follow Expeditionary Learning. All ELLs have access to these curricular models and participate, with modifications, in these programs. PS 188 uses a cognitive based math program, Go Math and Connected, along with weekly math exemplars to provide hands-on real world experiences with academic math concepts. Our science teachers implement the FOSS/Delta program of science discovery and investigation taught in self-contained science labs. Social studies is incorporated into the literacy curriculum in all of our classes. PS 188 follows the New York State curriculum in this area. All students, including ELLs, receive instruction in computers, physical education, music, and art. All students, including ELLs, are invited to participate in extended day and after-school programs. All partnerships at PS 188 are made available to ELLs. These include a weekend enrichment program with NYCARES, music classes through Third Street Music School, reading intervention through Reading Partners, reading support through Learning Leaders, an academic weekend enrichment program through JP Morgan, after-school programming through Education Alliance until six o’clock, and a middle school scholars lab Monday through Thursday until eight o’clock. Additionally PS/IS 188 offers ELLs access to various student support services. This year these include the school guidance counselor, the school social worker, the Jewish Board for Family and Children's Services counseling program, the Counseling in Schools (CIS) program, and the Child Mind Institute counseling program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs also receive support through instructional materials. In the ENL classroom ELLs are provided with a leveled library of literature in multiple genres. Books are arranged by levels, themes, and genres. Guided reading books from the Scholastic Program, Harcourt Trophies, and Reading A to Z are also available. Bilingual books, dictionaries, and kid-friendly newspapers are made available. ELLs have access and regularly use of a Smart Board, 20 Ipads, 10 netbook computers, 10 desktop computers, RazKids software, Reading A to Z software, Mindplay software, and Vocabulary Spelling City online. ELLs also have access to the instructional materials that are part of the core-curriculum of PS/IS 188 described above. This includes CKLA, Expeditionary Learning, Go Math, and Connected Math. The Smart Board is used to support classroom instruction by creating interactive visual presentations that are especially helpful to ELLs who require visual support and interactive activities to develop language. Laptops are used for ELLs as listening stations to listen to books read aloud through RazKids, research for project based learning, and other language learning software. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program ELLs receive native language support through bilingual books and dictionaries. During instruction, translations are used and encouraged for those ELLs with literacy in their L1 to provide additional native language support. Bilingual word walls are used as well. In the dual language program native language support is delivered in the child's L1 during native language arts instruction and, as needed, according to sound pedagogical principles during ENL instruction. Teachers attempt to include all classroom languages throughout the year so all ENL students are able to benefit and are included in instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Although ELLs at all grade levels are at various language proficiency levels, the services, support, and resources provided are at their appropriate grade and language level. Curriculum maps are aligned to Common Core Standards based on student grade level to ensure ELLs are receiving grade appropriate support. Additionally, instruction is tailored to meet student needs, it is always done so in a grade appropriate way. For example, some older students in sixth grade struggle with phonics. For these students, phonics support designed for older students is used and phonics is taught using age-appropriate materials such as using products from stores that represent English word sound patterns. Phonics support for Kindergarten children looks very different than phonics support for middle school students. This kind of differentiation by grade is applied throughout the ENL program. ELL-SWD’s are supported similarly by adapting services and resources. Grade-level texts are adapted by teachers so they are accessible by SWD’s, photographs are used as a support, and informational texts are used since they can often be accessed by a variety level of students because of their photographs and captions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 79  PS/MS 188 is co-located. The administration works closely with the other schools in the building to ensure all students have access to the gym, auditorium, library, and recreational areas. All common areas have a schedule of use and ENL students have access each day to all areas of the school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs at PS 188 receive excellent support from our bilingual parent coordinator. All newly enrolled ELL students are invited to attend an informational session as well as a walking tour of the school by the parent coordinator. In addition, upon arrival into their classroom, new arrivals are paired up with a more proficient buddy to help them acculturate to their new environment. Parent workshops are held very early in the school year to let parents know about the curriculum for ELLs and the various support services offered to parents who are not English speakers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time PS 188 does not offer foreign language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Our dual language program is currently in Kindergarten to Second grade. The model used is the self-contained simultaneous model. The instructional day is divided where 50% of the instruction is in English and 50% is in Spanish. EPs and ELLs are integrated for the entire instructional day. b. Language arts is taught using the Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) program which has two strands. The skills strand focuses on phonics, decoding, phonemic awareness, and spelling. This is taught in English. To teach emergent literacy in Spanish, “Palabras a su Paso” is used. The Listening and Learning strand of CKLA focuses on interactive read-alouds connected to various thematic units. This strand of the program is taught in English and Spanish. The CKLA curriculum is supplemented with engaging Spanish language read alouds and activies that follow the same theme taught in English. For example, on Monday children may learn, in English, about how the four seasons change according to the rotation of the Earth. On Tuesday, students might learn, in Spanish, how animals can adapt in different seasons. The CKLA Listening and Learning strand integrates science and social studies into thematic units. Math is taught using Go Math in English and Spanish using the simultaneous dual language model. The majority of our EP’s are at the emerging level. They are assessed in the target language using the ENIL independent reading assessment, Estrellita for foundational reading skills, Go Math assessments, and pre and post unit assessments. c. Language is separated using the 50/50 model each day. This time is divided between morning and afternoon. For example, Monday may be Spanish in the morning and English in the afternoon. Tuesday would then be reversed with English in the morning and Spanish in the afternoon. d. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages at the same time (simultaneous). The Estrellita and or Palabras a su Paso program is used for teaching Spanish and the Core Knowledge (skills strand) program is used for teaching English. 2018-19 CEP 80  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Teachers and school staff are provided professional development through the DOE, outside workshops at Teachers College. In addition, they attend in-school professional development each Monday and Tuesday after school. Our ENL teachers are also involved with the ongoing work at the Understanding Language Initiative at Stanford University, and the online resources provided on the EngageNY website. In the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL teachers at PS 188 will lead monthly workshops focused on working with ELLs and strategies teachers can use in the classroom to engage ELLs. Additionally, the ENL teachers will lead a study group using the book “Common Core for the Not So Common Learner, Grades K-5 English Language Arts Strategies” by Andrea Honigsfeld and Maria G. Dove. Teachers will be invited to meet once a week for 14 weeks during lunchtime to discuss this text. In addition, the ENL teachers are making an extensive library of professional books and resources available to teachers. This includes digital articles shared on Google Docs, rubrics useful for working with ELLs, lists of websites helpful for ELLs, and a physical library where books can be checked-out. The tentative schedule for eight monthly workshops is below and includes training time to show teachers how to use the online and physical resources provided for them: November 2017: Myths and Misconceptions About Second Language Learning December 2017: Understanding and Using Language Proficiency Rubrics for ELLs January 2018: ELL Scaffolding Ideas for the TCRWP Writer's Workshop February 2018: What research does and does not say about English Language Learners. March 2018: Vocabulary Routines and strategies for ELLs part 1 April 2018: Vocabulary Routines and strategies for ELLs part 2 June 2018: How the NYSESLAT and other assessments help us plan for instruction. 2. Common Core professional development is provided to all teachers, including ENL teachers, by the curriculum specialists from Core Knowledge, Expeditionary Learning, Go Math, and Connected Math. Additionally, teachers participate in professional development offerings through the department of educations, webinars provided by Engage NY, and various opportunities provided by outside organizations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Professional development is provided by the guidance counselors, schools staff, and the parent coordinator for staff to learn about ELLs and assist them with the transition from elementary to middle school. 4. Teachers not certified in ENL or BL education receive 15% of their PD hours with an ELL focus . Teachers certified in ENL or BL education receive 50% of total hours for ELL specific professional development. To ensure these mandated hours have been met the school keeps a log of ELL professional development attended by each teacher. Trainings held at PS 188 have a sign-in sheet that is kept on file for verification. The training program consists of attending professional development programs that focus on ELLs by outside providers and workshops led by the ENL certified teachers at PS 188. In the previous school year teachers attended ENL training from workshops led by Teacher’s College and other outside organizations. Teachers provide the school secretary with workshop agendas to keep on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 81  Our school provides annual individual meetings to parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs by scheduling one-on-one meetings during the Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions. Each Tuesday time is set aside between 3:30 and 4:10 to meet with the parents of ELLs. Each Tuesday two parents are scheduled to meet with each ENL teacher by sending a request home in their preferred language. If the parent is unable to meet during that day or time, then they are asked to suggest either an alternate Tuesday or an alternate time. A phone conversation with a translator will also be offered. The ENL teachers try hard to meet all parent requests and set certain time aside for meetings before school, during the school day, and in the evening. The meetings will begin in November so teachers and parents will have student work samples to discuss during the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parents participate in services provided through partnerships with Learning Leaders, New York Cares Computer Classes, and ENL instruction provided by BMCC. We have and will continue to sponsor numerous workshops throughout the school year with a focus on the parents of our ELLs. Translation services are provided at all events in the parents preferred language. The parent coordinator plans a schedule of workshops. Some offerings include: The parent coordinator reaches out to families of ENL students and maintains a close relationship with these families so they are involved in all offered events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The ENL program at PS 188 is evolving to best meet the needs of the diverse population of ELLs at our school. In previous years we have already taken steps to ensure the ENL program is strengthened by focusing on collaboration with classroom teachers, integrating smart boards and computer assisted learning for ELLs in classrooms, providing before and after-school support programs for ELLs, designing new assessment procedures for ELLs, and increasing professional development opportunities for school staff. To guarantee the ENL program at PS 188 is growing and improving, the LAP team is already setting goals for upcoming school years. These goals include providing more time for ENL teachers to collaborate with classroom teachers, more ways to modify Common Core curriculum for ELLS, and investing in new technology and programs that are proven to help ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 82 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Suany Ramos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 83  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 188 The Island School School DBN: 01M188 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Suany Ramos Title Principal Rosa Almonte Assistant Principal Mirta Rosales Parent Coordinator Ian Gold ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marleny Peralta Parent Silvia Elsayed/Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Dilifer Inoa/Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ana Perez School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Rebecca Baez Other ENL Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/26/17 0/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 2018-19 CEP 84  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M188 School Name: PS Superintendent: Daniella Philip The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mirta Rosales Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When families enroll their child at PS/MS 188, the Home Language Identification Survey is administered in the language preferred by the family. As part of the survey parents are asked which language they prefer when receiving communications from the school. The parent coordinator tracks the language preferences of each family using this form. Families also complete the Student Emergency Contact cards at registration that contain language preferences of parents. Since PS/MS 188 is a community school, we also administer parent surveys during the year to determine the needs of families at our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 85  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Chinese Bengali Mandinka Cantonese 128 11 3 2 0 31% 2% .7% .4% 0 131 6 4 2 1 32% 1% .9% .4% .2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish is the only language that represents at least a 10% population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Annual Handbook, School Calendar September New York State Testing Dates and Information January/February Classroom Newsletters, Community School Newsletter, School Leadership Team Announcements Monthly Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Quarterly Special Event Flyers, Workshops Periodically Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. This handbook and calendar is translated during the summer by school staff and translators from the DOE interpretation unit. The testing dates and information is translated by school staff (parent coordinator) and translators from the DOE interpretation unit. The monthly correspondence is translated by school staff, teachers, the parent coordinator and translators from the DOE interpretation unit. Quarterly announcements are translated by school staff, teachers, the parent coordinator and translators from the DOE interpretation unit. Periodic announcements are translated by school staff, teachers, the parent coordinator and translators from the DOE interpretation unit. 2018-19 CEP 86  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences for 2015-2016 will occur on the following days: September 17 th November 4 th March2 nd May 12 th Each Tuesday there is time set aside between 3:30 and 4:10 for parents to meet with teachers. Every Tuesday between 3:30 and 4:10 Parent workshops take place at PS/IS 188 throughout the year. Periodically during mornings and afternoons. interpretation service(s)? During parent teacher conferences all support staff such as paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and the parent coordinator who speak languages other than English are available for translation. In instances of lower incident languages, the parent teacher conferences are scheduled so the Chinese or Bengali speaking teacher and staff members can be present. During this time translators are available. Since the most common language in our school needed for translation is Spanish, there are always Spanish/English bilingual staff or teachers available to translate in person during this time. If a parent requires a different language then the teacher will schedule the meeting so one of our staff is available to translate at that time. Parents are asked about language preferences when registering for workshops and translators are provided as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school secretary works with the Parent Coordinator, Mirta Rosales to send out automated school messenger phone calls that parents receive in the language of their preference. Over the phone interpreters through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Office are used when communicating with parents who do not speak Spanish or a language shared by one of our staff members or teachers. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 87  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In early September all staff members receive training in the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 that stipulates the right of parents to receive communications in their preferred language. Staff and teachers receive a list of personnel in the school who speak languages other than English, they receive the e-mail address and phone number of the Translation and Interpretation unit. Staff and teachers are shown how to access the Translation and Interpretation Unit intranet page. They receive copies of "Best Practices for Communicating with Immigrant Families," "Guidelines for Working with Interpreters," and all handouts from the "Language Access Kit." They are encouraged to ask questions of the Parent Coordinator and ESL teachers if they are unsure about how to access translation or interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents requiring translation/interpretations will be provided with a copy of Parents Bill of Rights respecting translation and interpretation services (Spanish, Bengali, Chinese). Copies in each of these specified languages and English will be posted on the Lobby Bulletin Board, and within the Main Office and PTA Room. Additionally, the School’s Safety Committee will make provision to assure that parents of these languages can communicate with the school in their native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents is gathered in several ways. Since PS/MS 188 is a Community School, parent surveys are given about the quality and availability of translation services. Also, parent teacher conferences are a time for parents to provide feedback to teachers and staff about how their language preferences are being met. In addition, Tuesday afternoon parent meetings and the school surveys provide another source of feedback. 2018-19 CEP 88 
