2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M198 School Name: P.S. 198 ISADOR E. IDA STRAUS Principal: KATHARINE MACMANUS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 02M198 PS 198M 310200010198 Pre-Kindergarten-Fifth Grade 1700 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10128 212-289-3702 Phone Number: 212-410-1731 Fax: Katharine Macmanus kmacmanus@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Katharine Macmanus Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michelle Bellizzi Monica Catani Eugenia Tinsley N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: Room713 blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: (212) 769-7619 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan (Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) FSC: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue, Manhattan, Room 828, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Katharine DeBenedictis Michelle Bellizzi Monica Catani N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A TaliaBerger Carolyn Rindone Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mark Bray Renee Enoch Kristy Sundjaja Kalsang Tashering Linda Shkreli Clare Huston Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Staff Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 198 is committed to preparing every child to become compassionate and responsible members of our community. We believe that personal and academic excellence results from opportunities that foster collaboration, creativity, and self-reflection. Our students are valued as diverse individuals, each with their own unique interests, experiences, and educational needs. Together with our families, we set high expectations for all students, and model what our children need to do to develop their self-esteem, sustain healthy friendships, and achieve academic success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.198M, the Isidor and Ida Straus School, is a nurturing learning community committed to academic excellence. Known by our school community as “A Big City School with a Small Town Feel,” P.S.198M is among the most ethnically diverse in District 2’s Upper East Side of Manhattan. P.S.198M has 484 students, which includes Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade classes and a Gifted & Talented and Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) class on every grade. We are an inclusive community, in which students with exceptional needs are integrated into all classes. For that reason, the collaborative practices of teachers are emphasized and valued. G&T, ICT, and General Education teachers work together to strengthen their pedagogy in order to reach the diverse community of student learners. With a staff of about 70, we support Specialist positions in the areas of Science, Art, Physical Education, Music, and Technology, paraprofessionals, a Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) teacher/IEP teacher, English-as-a New-Language (ENL) teacher, Occupational and Physical therapists, Speech teachers, as well as two school psychologists and a full-time Guidance Counselor and Social Worker. Our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and administration work together to improve school-wide communication and engagement opportunities so that families are informed and participate actively in their child’s education. We offer a variety of opportunities for learning and events both to build community and some as fund raising efforts. Families are included in weekly email updates, monthly newsletters, grade wide coffee chats, and parent workshops. We encourage families to participate in events such as our Read-a-thon, Pep Parades STEM night. PS 198M is a co-located school. We share a building with another elementary school, PS 77. Our partnership is strong. Just as we look to build community within our own school, we also seek to engage the larger building wide community. Throughout the school year we like to partner with PS 77 for specific building wide events, such as International Night and spirit days. P.S. 198M shares a Safety Committee, Student Council and Green Team. Our students enjoy being PS198M Bulldogs and take pride in working towards building a community that feels joyful and safe so that all children can learn. Through the use of the Random Acts of Kindness curriculum, our upper grade students have the opportunity to be leaders, sharing with younger grades lessons they've learned and messaging the community about school-wide expectations for behavior and positive school culture. The school has put forth tremendous effort to transform its culture into one of high expectations that are shared by students, parents and faculty. A culture for learning and a system of accountability drives our progress, and all stakeholders are focused on ensuring that students reach their goals and are prepared for the next levels of their education. Our community shares high expectations for all members, including staff and families. Clear expectations about behavior, attendance, and punctuality are connected directly to student success in the present and future. This culture of collaboration has resulted in a 21 point increase in ELA proficiency levels since 2016, and a 13 point increase in math. P.S.198M uses various curriculum resources such as Go Math! (K-5) and Engage NY, and follows a workshop model for literacy using the Lucy Calkins Units of Study. As a school, there is great emphasis on creating systems that support the collaborative practices of teachers so that instruction is focused on New York State Standards and specific skills that align. In an effort to critically analyze any curriculum utilized in the school and to choose appropriate supplemental resources, PS 198M continuously strives to build effective teacher teams that together assess student progress and adjust the curriculum to meet the needs of each child. All children are taught to develop critical thinking skills and work collaboratively to develop prosocial behaviors as they study topics deeply and across multiple academic subjects. Teachers work together and adjust the curriculum to suit the needs of individual students (above and below grade level standards). They engage in frequent professional learning opportunities to support these efforts and make their teaching stronger. Furthermore, our message to families regarding depth of content rather than breadth is a more effective way to ensure adequate progress, mastery of standards and preparation for middle school. P.S. 198M recognizes children have varying interests, strengths, and talents. To that end, we strive to complement the curriculum by offering each grade a special learning enrichment that may appeal to a wide range of children. We offer yoga with Bent On Learning, chess with NYChess Kids, ballroom dancing with Dancing Classrooms, Hip Hop and 2018-19 CEP 10  African Drummign with LeAP, and Fencing with New Amsterdam Fencing Academy. In addition to these grade-wide enrichment opportunities, we have a strong partnership with Price Waterhouse Coopers (PWC) who offers Creative Computing, a coding program for 4th and 5th graders. School Health Solutions is an offering for our fifth graders which educates students about healthy habits and puberty. In addition, the Playworks program provides a full-time coach who works at P.S.198M creating opportunities for creative play, developing leadership competencies and promoting physical activity, before, during, and after school. After school, our students participate in a variety of activities including Story Pirates, a school musical for 2nd-5th graders, Chess, Playworks Junior Coaches, and Young People’s Chorus. We offer a free Beacon program within our school building, as well as after school enrichment classes through Kids in the Game (KING). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Gifted & Talented and Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes on every grade 18% receive special education services and 5.86% are English Language Learners 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. While we continue to focus on improving teacher practice to ensure the highest quality instruction, teachers engage in study groups to expand their knowledge of content and pedagogy. Our instructional focus emphasizes using multiple data sources to inform three key, child-centered components of learning: the "what," "how" and "why." Through professional learning opportunities that explore various data sources, teachers collaborate to determine priority skills (the "what") within each standard and generate strategies (the "how"), to help a student acquire the skill. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M198 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 461 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 1 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 45 4 13 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 38.0% % Attendance Rate 33.8% % Reduced Lunch 5.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 23.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 3% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 77.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 64 13 94.8% 3.5% 21.5% 10.0% 20.8% 3.0% 2 5% 6.9 78.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After a review of 2018 English Language Arts exam, 78% of students scored “proficient” (level 3 or 4) in grades three to five. Although scores rose 17 points in the last year, gaps still exist between our Black and Hispanic sub groups as compared to our white and Asian students. 50% Black students and 65% of Hispanic students reached proficiency levels of these exams compared to 83% white and 97% of Asian students. Currently, 46% of Black and Hispanic students in K-2 are reading at grade level in October 2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 48% of Black and Hispanic students in grades K-2 will be reading on or above grade level, determined by holistic assessment using multiple sources to accurately determine a student's independent reading level (Running record assessment, Scholastic Independent Reading assessments, TC unit assessments). 2018-19 CEP 13 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Kindergarten-2rd graders Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, grades K-2 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Wilson Fundations for Word Study: Students in K-2 will participate in a tier 1, multi-sensory systematic phonics, fluency, vocabulary, spelling and comprehension program. The research based Wilson intervention program is administered daily by a trained classroom teacher. Supportive materials are sent home periodically. Ongoing Guided Reading and Strategy Group Instruction K through 5th Grade Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom instruction consists of data driven ongoing Guided Reading groups and strategy groups. Groups are determined based on informal and formal running record assessment information. Guided reading groups (3-5 students) occur multiple times across the week. Students receive instruction in a skill area that is applicable to reading habits that will allow them to become fluent readers who read with accuracy and comprehension. Strategy groups (3-5 students) meet weekly and target long-term goals by introducing specific strategies that build upon each other and promote progress across a 4-8 week period. Implementation of Units of Study for Teaching Reading and Writing K-5, the Workshop Approach: Selected curriculum is aligned with standards for New York State. The skills addressed in this reading and writing program K through 5th Grade students Sept. 2018-June 2019 All classroom teachers provide small group instruction. SETSS teacher provides additional guided reading support for select students as determined by IEP needs. All classroom teachers are responsible for program implementation. Principal and Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 14 are responsible for scheduling staff development, supervision of data inquiry, and evaluative feedback and growth plans for teachers. All K-2 classroom teachers are responsible for implementation. Principal and Assistant Principal are responsible for scheduling staff development, supervision of data inquiry, and evaluative feedback and growth plans for teachers. Classroom teachers in collaboration with administration, parents builds foundational literacy skills where our school data shows a deficit. Specially Designed Instruction within the Workshop Special education teachers will deliver specially designed instruction in ICT classes to support students with disabilities. Across all classes, strategy group instruction based on assessment data will be utilized to effectively engage students in standards aligned, rigorous tasks. Principles of Universal Design for Learning will be incorporated into all instruction to meet the needs of any learner including special populations. Teachers utilize a UDL unit planning template to ensure that these variations are planned for. Implementation of Additional Balanced Literacy Practices Shared Reading and Interactive Writing are balanced literacy structures meant to provide tier 1 supports to young children. Classroom teachers will work with the school's literacy consultant to strengthen their instructional practices and implement these structures daily. K through 2nd grade students Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Engagement and Education K through 5th Grade Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parents are notified of student reading progress and ongoing goal setting formally, 4 times a year (November, January, March, June) in conferences and written progress reports. Additionally, parents are invited to make appointments with teachers during the school's weekly Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement sessions. 6 Family Fridays are offered as a way of connecting parents with classroom instruction. Teachers offer parents the chance to observe them teach, and then participate in the classroom activity in order to deepen their understanding of literacy standards. Often parents are introduced to the strategies students are using to build their literacy skills and therefore 2018-19 CEP 15  families are better equipped to assist students at home with nightly reading and homework. Nightly independent reading is expected school-wide. The school provides reading material from classroom libraries for nightly reading and return, but also offers free books to any family who wants additional material to keep at home. Parents will be offered 2 workshops that help them more deeply understand the literacy standards for NYS as they relate specifically to ELA. During workshops, families will have the opportunity to engage in rigorous activities in which they can experience the content and skills children are expected to know and understand. A Read-a-Thon is hosted during the month of November, as a way of promoting increased reading stamina school-wide. Parents are encouraged to help their child track their daily reading progress via their personalized online page. During the Read-a-Thon, author visits will be provided to each grade to encourage reading and writing. A Summer Reading Challenge promotes reading during the summer. Students are encouraged to participate and receive a medal at the start of the school year. Sounds in Motion Sounds in Motion is an intervention program designed to develop listening skills in children. Uniquely, it pairs kinesthetic gross motor movements with phonemes to teach articulation, phonemic awareness and sound/symbol association. Speech Teachers target kindergarten and first grade classrooms as a tier 1 intervention. Speech Teachers push into the classroom and collaborate with classroom teachers to deliver instruction to small groups of students. Barb Golub, Global Literacy Consultant (11 days) K and 1st grade students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Speech Teachers in collaboration with kindergarten/first grade classroom teachers. K-5th grade teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal work with Barb Golub to determine areas of need. 2018-19 CEP 16 Monthly professional development opportunities are provided to teachers to build their instructional skills and technique in the area of literacy. Barb Golub conducts workshops and pushes into classrooms for modeling, coaching, and opportunities for non-evaluative feedback. Teachers collaborate with Barb Golub by using reading assessments (Units of Study assessments, Fountas and Pinnell running records and Scholastic Independent Reading Assessments) to guide classroom instruction, utilizing professional text as an additional resource and support. District 2 Universal Literacy Coach District 2 will provide a Universal Literacy Coach who will provide direct support in the implementation of balanced literacy practices for new teachers in grades K-2. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers participate in professional learning opportunities. New teachers grades K-2 Cycles from November 2018-June 2019 Universal literacy Coach with administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 198 hosts Monthly Family Fridays. In the 2018-2019 school year, a minimum of two Family Friday events will focus on ELA instruction, allowing families the opportunity to observe teachers and students engaged in ELA practices. An "ELA Morning" will be hosted by the Grade Team Leaders to educate families on the expectations of the standards in literacy. A curriculum night will be hosted by classroom teachers about the curriculum that will be addressed during the school year. Monthly teacher newsletters will share the work of grade teams and inform families of shifts within the ELA curriculum. One Parent-Teacher Conference (March) will be Student-Led. Students in grades Kindergarten-5th Grade will host their family and share specific skills and strategies they are working on in literacy. The school's March Read-A-Thon will be a collaborative project between administration, staff, PTA and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will be allocated to support the implementation of selected programs including purchasing of materials for Wilson Fundations, Teachers College Units of Study, and multi-day teacher training including Barb Golub, Global Literacy Consultant. The kindergarten-2nd grade schedule will be arranged so that the first period of the day, teachers are utilizing the Wilson Fundations program, allowing for children from various classrooms to work within a group that meets their individualized needs. Speech Teachers will receive training from Central to support the 2018-19 CEP 17  implementation fo the Sounds in Motion program. Funding from the school budget will support the Sounds in Motion initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, 64% of students will be reading on grade level or above, as indicated on the Reading Level Report, as measured by multiple sources to accurately determine a student's independent reading level (Running record assessment, Scholastic Independent Reading assessments, TC unit assessments). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell - levels A-J Scholastic Reading Assessments - levels J and above Teachers College Sight Word Lists, Concepts of Print and Letter-Sound Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 198 currently addresses school culture and pro social behaviors through a variety of school wide classroom supports, as well as additional interventions for students and families with more significant needs. We are committed to educating students in the least restrictive environment within their zoned community school, or special program (i.e. Gifted and Talented). Current school practices that promote a positive school culture and climate and allow for students to be successful include: 1. 2. instruction designed using the principles of Universal Design for Learning in order to create access to a wide range of learners including special populations. Implementation of Random Acts of Kindness curriculum, K-5th grade & literacy based, social emotional Project EXSEL curriculum. 3. Weekly RTI team meetings to support teachers with the implementation of Tier 1 and 2 academic, social and behavioral supports. 4. Special Implementation Team (SIT) meetings monthly, with a focus on creating student access to curriculum, writing quality IEPs and behavior. This team works with the School Psychologist to coordinate Functional Behavioral Assessments and Behavior Intervention plans. 5. Employing a full time Guidance Counselor and Social Worker to connect with the families of students who have high tardiness, absences and discipline referrals, to create responsive interventions, including small groups that target the development of appropriate social and emotional competencies. 6. Partnership with the Child Mind Institute to offer weekly, small group Cognitive Behavioral Therapy sessions and Resiliency Groups for students in grades 3-5. 7. An established Crisis De-Escalation team which creates student specific crisis plans and supports students, teachers and families in crisis situations. 8. School Culture and Climate Committee which creates social emotional learning focused Book of the Month projects for school wide focus. 9. RULER implementation team established in April 2018 for the purpose of bringing Yale RULER practices to the school community. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey data, 93% of families report that they feel informed of psychological or emotional issues that can impact student progress. Additionally, 96% of families have reported that they feel their child is safe at school. The Quality Review Rubric expects that schools maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of the students and the adults in the building. Whereas School Survey results do not indicate that parents feel that behavior across the school impacts classroom learning, 63% of teachers reported concerns in response to questions regarding classroom behavior, and therefore further work can be done to improve the school environment so that all children, families and teachers feel successful. A positive school culture must exist at all levels, beginning with school leadership, reaching staff, families and students. Therefore PS 198 seeks to further strengthen the school by engaging all stakeholders in learning around emotional intelligence. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will receive training using the RULER approach from the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence. 80% of staff will indicate level 4 or 5 (positive) responses to survey questions on the "Staff Charter Survey," a tool created by the RULER implementation team using the guidance of the Yale RULER online resources. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 April 2018-June 2019 RULER implementation team Administration September 2018-June 2019 RULER implementation team  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Increase RULER implementation team members by adding at least 3 additional staff members (2 teachers, 1 additional staff member). All staff RULER training provided to implementation team through YALE Center for Emotional Intelligence: RULER implementation team (Principal, 2 teacher leaders) Training includes 2 day in person training, 4- 1 hour virtual coaching sessions with RULER coach. Ongoing access to RULER resources online. RULER Training for all PS 198 Staff All staff RULER begins with staff personal and professional learning, continues with classroom instruction and family engagement, and becomes embedded seamlessly into policies and practices school-wide. Training will take place during Monday afternoon professional learning cycles and Other Professional Work Time. About 8 times across the year, full sessions will be devoted to learning the RULER practices, however ongoing reinforcement of the RULER teaching will be implemented into weekly afternoon sessions through the use of protocols and specific RULER tools (i.e. mood meter, charter). All faculty and staff throughout the training will have access to online resources including videos, staff courses, activity guides, sample student lessons, and other resources to support the seamless integration of RULER into staff development, classroom instruction, and family engagement. 2018-19 CEP 21 Analyze the OORS data 2x a year to get baseline information for future assessment of the effectiveness of the RULER approach. Focus on infractions: A06, A07, A13, A17. RULER implementation team February 2018 School Leadership Team RULER implementation team will create a Staff Charter Survey to evaluate the effectiveness of the RULER training. All staff June 2018 September/October 2018 RULER implementation team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The roll out of the RULER approach will be messaged to families through the Principal's quarterly newsletter and various school events, including specific workshops. The PTA Secretary will work with the Principal to coordinate the weekly email blast to families, which will also include RULER resources for families to engage in the RULER work. Additionally, the previous and ongoing work of the school will continue to support families in understanding the framework element, Supportive Environment. Family Friday is offered monthly and an opportunity for families to come observe the daily happenings of the classroom. Three Family Fridays will be reserved for building community and social emotional learning. In addition to Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement opportunities and standard Parent-Teacher Conferences, Student-led conferences will be held in March. Students will report on specific social/behavioral goals and strategies. This is also an opportunity for parents to see how the school develops the child using an approach which encourages students to build skills beyond traditional academics, but also supports growth in listening and speaking skills, presentation abilities, use of technology and art. The Book of the Month program will be shared with families through the PTA weekly email blast and via teacher newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Align teacher schedules so that meetings for RULER implementation team are possible. Work with PTA to budget awards for ongoing positive behavior supports, i.e. school tshirts, waterbottles, etc. and to schedule family events and communication. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  In February 2018, the RULER implementation team will administer the school's "Staff Charter Survey," to determine mid point progress. Survey results will indicate 60% of all staff submitting either level 3, 4 or 5 (positive) responses to all survey questions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff Charter Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s recent state testing data in math shows consistent growth for the last three years. State test scores in mathematic rose from 65% proficiency in 2016 to 78% proficiency in 2018. Teacher's collaborate in grade teams to review the CCLS in mathematics and create rigorous classroom environments by thoughtfully planning and implementing aspects of the GO Math! curriculum along with Context for Learning, Engage NY and Investigations. In the 2017-2018 school year, all teachers, Pre-K-5th grade engaged in a cycle of professional learning focused on a particular area of math instruction, such as assessment, questioning and discussion, mindset, etc. These collaborative efforts have shifted the approach teachers now take in math classrooms. Whereas in the past, math instruction was primarily workbook based, using solely the GO Math! curriculum, teachers now adopt other resources to supplement with highly engaging math games or tasks. Students engage in greater exploration and math concepts are often taught in the context of real life problems. Teachers collaborate to analyze the sequence of lessons as laid out in the GO Math! Curriculum and make adjustments where needed. Teacher leaders and supervisors have reviewed and reflected upon the curriculum, teacher practice, and state testing data from June 2018, and have determined that there is a need for greater content understanding for teachers, specifically in in grades 3-5. Targeted and collaborative professional development that addresses specific critical areas is needed to improve teacher practice and improve student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through professional development and collaboration to strengthen math practices and improve student outcomes, by June of 2019 there will be a 2% increase in the number of students in grades 3-5 who will achieve a proficient level on the NY State Mathematics Assessment compared to the 2018 NY State Mathematics Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade Team Leaders will meet consistently to discuss potential professional learning opportunities for the staff, i.e. creating self-guided study groups to support teacher collaboration and to build mathematical practices. Kindergarten through Fifth Grade teacher teams will be provided weekly planning time, with the intent to elevate the rigor and focus in the critical areas of grade level standards outlined in the CCLS. Teachers will utilize this time to analyze student work and data to identify common trends. In addition, they will work together to modify curricula to meet the needs of all students. Classroom Teachers K-5 Classroom Teachers K-5 Principal and/or/with Grade Level Leaders with the support of a math coach will engage in classroom walk-throughs three points throughout the year to assess the implementation of math instruction. Classroom Teachers Administration, Grade Team Leaders K-5 Classroom Teachers Math Coach, Classroom Teachers September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018, January 2019, May 2019 Classroom teachers will review and analyze June Instructional Reports from the 2018 NYS math exam to identify areas of potential weakness across the school/grades and special populations including SWDs and ELLs. Teachers will use this data to collaborate to adjust unit curriculum maps to match areas of need. Classroom teachers 3-5 November 2018 3-5 Classroom teachers Grade teams will utilize a school created UDL unit planning template in order to create comprehensive unit plans that match the scope and sequence of the math curriculum and create access for SWDs and ELLs. Classroom Teachers/Students K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 K-5 Classroom teachers Professional Development opportunities will be provided to one math teacher leader through the District 2 math leadership series. Math teacher leader September 2018-June 2019 Math teacher leader Collaborative professional development opportunities will be provided to teachers through a math coach on staff 1 day per week. Professional learning opportunities will focus on data driven strategy group work. Classroom Teachers K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Math coach, classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 25 As a supplement to GO Math! and Engage NY, teachers will implement at least two Context for Learning units with the support of the math coach. Classroom Teachers/Students K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Math coach, classroom teachers School-wide subscription to New Perspectives Online will be provided to teachers for support in using the Context for Learning resources. Classroom Teachers K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, math coach, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 198 hosts Monthly Family Fridays. In the 2018-2019 school year, a minimum of one Family Friday event will focus on mathematics instruction, allowing families the opportunity to observe teachers and students engaged in math practices. A "Math Morning" will be hosted by the math coach and teachers to educate families on the expectations of the CCLS in mathematics. PS 198 will host a STEM night in February, allowing families the opportunity to engage in STEM activities with their children. Monthly teacher newsletters will share the work of grade teams and inform families of shifts within the math curriculum. One Parent-Teacher Conference (March) will be Student-Led. Students in grades Kindergarten-5th Grade will host their family and share specific skills and strategies they are working on in math. A February Math-a-Thon will be coordinated as a partnership between the PTA, teachers and administration. Take home math challenges will supplement the Math-a-Thon. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The master schedule will be created to allow grade teams to receive multiple periods of common planning, an annual subscription to digital Exemplars resource and New Perspectives Online will be provided by the PTA. Substitute teacher coverage to facilitate cycles of intervisitation for mathematics professional development will be supported the the school's budget. The PTA has financed a math coach on staff, 1 day per week. Wherever possible, the school's budget will also allocate funding for professional learning activities focused on math instruction and concept understanding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In grades 1-5, February 2019, the percentage of students receiving a 3 or above on their January report card will increase by 1% as compared to November 2018 progress reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. YCDOE report card, to be issued at the beginning of February. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school community, we are moving towards a more inclusive, distributive leadership model. Professional development cycles of learning and meetings have more ongoing staff input to reflect the needs of the teachers and their students. We are continuing to strengthen our transparency of school goals for staff and families. According to the 2017-2018 School Survey results, 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that school leadership communicates a clear vision for the school and understands how students learn. 97% of teachers agree or strongly agree that administration carefully tracks student academic progress and 84% of teachers feel as though the administration is involved in their planning. These survey outcomes indicate that school leadership has set up systems to follow student progress on a broad, school wide level, and is active in the planning and monitoring of curriculum and instruction; however, connection to day to day classrooms can be optimized as 77% of teachers felt as though school leadership is involved in the daily happenings of the classroom. This shows that there is room for increased collaboration between teachers and school leadership for the purpose of bettering programming for students and systems of support for staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Administration will take a collaborative learning stance to maximize school structures and supports which promote student achievement, as indicated by 85% positive ratings in all NYC School Survey measures for Effective School Leadership. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly, classroom walkthroughs to assess implementation and alignment of ELA and math curricula, including Teachers College Units of Study & Wilson Fundations, Context for Learning. Grade Team Leaders/Literacy Consultant/Math Coach to attend walkthroughs 4 times throughout the school year. Professional Learning Experiences with coaches will be attended by administration Administration will provide and participate in labsite experiences as well as coaching support, specifically to new teachers but expanding to include returning staff Twice monthly meetings with Grade Team Leaders to evaluate instructional initiatives through a review of building walkthroughs and professional development activities. Initial Planning Conferences with teachers in the fall will review 2018 Summative Conference goals and encourage teachers to consider various leadership roles in which they can participate in collaborative discussions and shared decision making with school leadership Committees Re-established in Fall 2018: Grade Team Leaders/PD School Culture and Climate Crisis DeEscalation SIT MoSL Ongoing Professional Learning Opportunities Monday Afternoon Self-Guided Study Groups Barb Golub, Global Literacy Consultant Professional learning cycles with math coach Pre-K monthly meetings with Early Childhood Instructional Coordinator Students & Teachers grades K-5th September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers K-5 September 2018-Administration June 2019 Teachers grades K-5th September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Grade Team Leaders Classroom teachers September/October 2018 Classroom teachers and administration All teachers September 2018 Administration and classroom teachers All teachers September 2018-Administration June 2019 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive a quarterly newsletter from the Principal which will outline instructional initiatives. During September's Meet the Teacher Night, administration will present to families the instructional goals of the school for the year. Ongoing "coffee chats" with class parents will share progress, events, or changes. Multiple workshop opportunities will be provided to families through a collaboration between teachers and school leadership, aligned with the Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers goal. Coherence across classrooms will capture the collaborative learning stance and be evident in monthly Family Friday events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding from multiple sources to utilize the services of Barb Golub, Global Literacy Consultant 11 times across the year and to support the salary of a math coach 1x per week. Alignment of teacher schedules to allow for teams to meet before, during, after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A school based survey created collaboratively by the Grade Team Leaders and administration will be administered in December 2018. 83% of teachers will provide positive responses to indicators similar to the Effective School Leadership components of the DOE School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade Team Leaders Survey mid year benchmark, NYCDOE School Survey for end of year progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent involvement in a child's education is found to be positively associated with a child's academic performance. PS 198 continuously looks for ways to engage families in school programming. The PTA and administration have created events and modified our calendars to better target and inform all families. We have started a financial assistance program through the PTA which allows for families who would be eligible for free lunch, to anonymously receive assistance to attend PTA sponsored school events, such as the spring auction. However, parent engagement data shows that Parent-Teacher Conferences are widely attended, with almost 100% attendance, but monthly Family Friday events geared towards educating families on curriculum and instruction are only attended on average by about 50% of families. Other workshops for families attract less participants. By focusing on families that had previously not attended school wide events, we have adjusted our community building programs to be more inclusive to address their needs. We link important workshops/events with significant dates, i.e. Parent Teacher Conferences, Pep Parades, etc. We anticipate that certain factors may be keeping families from attending. The factors that may deter families from attending school wide events are included below. We take these factors into account as we determine an action plan to engage more families in our school: Language barrier   Cultural differences with regards to home-school connections  Childcare needs    Age of students- assumption that older students do not require parent engagement Job requirements Socio-economic status Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family participation at monthly Family Fridays will increase by 10% school-wide as compared to the 2017-2018 average participation rate. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The PTA and school events calendars modified and continuously distributed to better target family needs and keep families informed. All families Family Friday events scheduled strategically to align with PTA meetings and school-wide initiatives, i.e. SEL learning, ELA, etc. All families The Parent Coordinator will utilize the experts within our community to provide family workshops that target specific needs of the parent population and to include parents of students with disabilities and ELLs. Teachers host specific workshops during parent engagement time directed towards specific topics related to SWDs and ELLs. Orientation meetings for families of ELLs and ICT classes will be provided in order for families to build a relationship with the school at the start of the year. Telephone and print translation services utilized to communicate with families who speak/read languages other than English. Family Friday reminders distributed that week. School CNXT blasts to personally extend invitations to classes with lower attendance at Family Friday events. Principal, teacher, Parent Coordinator, and PTA newsletters will provide information about school events. Bulletin boards and weekly e-blasts will post timely announcements to better engage families. All families Families of SWDs and ELLs Families of ELLs and SPED students All families Classes with less than 65% attendance at Family Friday events All families August 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018 Administration, Parent Coordinator, PTA Administration, Parent Coordinator, various school committees, i.e. School Culture and Climate Committee or Grade Team Leaders Parent Coordinator, Administration Classroom teachers ENL teacher, ICT teachers, Administration August 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator, other school staff October 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA delegates, class parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, classroom teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA 2018-19 CEP 32 Coffee Chats with class parents and the administration held two times a year. The information will be shared by each class representative with families. School wide events will include a range of programming, including but not limited to monthly safety meetings, musical performances, PTA meetings, workshops, Pep Parades, bake sales, etc. Three designated Family Fridays and two "play dates" in the school yard will be devoted to bridging community between PS 198 families and staff. Class Parents November Administration 2018 April 2019 September 2018- June 2019 All staff All families All families September 2018 All staff Use of School CNXT, a school wide communication system. All families November 2018 December 2018 April 2019 June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 All staff, families, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Child Mind Institute, NYU Dental Van, local politicians, 92nd street Y Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. One Friday a month, first period reserved for a Family Friday activity across the school. Teachers will utilize the Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement time for additional workshops and "play day" afternoons in our school yard. Morning workshops will be offered periodically throughout the year. Coverage for teachers will be provided by Specialists and/or substitutes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Review of Family Friday sign in sheets, November, February, May Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly Family Friday sign in sheets recorded in the PCAR. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After School During school day in either push-in or pull out services Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Prior NYS assessment scores and report card scores (3rd-5th Grade) Teacher referrals First grade students who meet criteria for Reading Rescue Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) After School ELA test prep Small group and one- on-one Reading Rescue Students inK& 1st gradewho meet criteria for Sounds in Motion Sounds in Motion 2018-19 CEP 35 Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students not meeting benchmarks as indicated by unit assessments and ECAM assessmentwill be provided with intervention services. Prior NYS assessment scores and report card scores (3rd-5th grade) Students will be provided science intervention based upon ELA and Science assessments. Students will be provided social studies intervention based upon ELA assessments. Students are recommended by the Response to Intervention Team (RTI) which includes classroom teachers, administration and all service providers in the school. Guided math practice Small group and one- on-one After school math test prep Close reading instruction using nonfiction text Small group and one- on-one Close reading instruction using nonfiction text Small group and one- on-one Cognitive Behavioral Therapy At-risk school based counselling services for students (K-5) Small group therapy for students in grades 4 and 5 based on needs assessment. Small group and one- on-one During school day in either push-in or pull- out services Test Preparation in grades 3-5 During school day in either push-in or pull- out services During school day in either push-in or pull- out services During school day delivered by Child Mind Institute clinicians During school day in either push-in or pull- out services delivered by school Guidance Counselor and Social Worker 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37 Outreach efforts to provide emergency supplies including toothbrushes, warm weather clothing, school supplies, school snacks, or other needed items. Outreach efforts to provide services for families in need, such as flu shots and a dental van. Partnership with the Child Mind Institute will provide resiliency group training to STH as needed. Recommendations for outside services and supports to STH and their families to be provided by School Mental Health Consultant. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $2,374 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 198, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS198-Isidor and Ida Straus School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 198 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The Isidor and Ida Straus School Borough Manhattan School Number 198 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Katharine Macmanus Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Minjung Jamie Kim Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Karen Bugden Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Linda Shkreli Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Danielle Santana Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 409 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.60%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 198 uses informal and formal assessments throughout the school year. P.S. 198 uses Fountas and Pinnell assessment programs , teacher-created assessments, TCRWP assessment, Exemplar and On-Demand writing assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The information collected through assessments is to identify the needs and set goals for each student and differentiate instruction. Based on assessments, the students who need additional support in specific modality are given small group Tier II interventions include Learning Leaders, Nessy, Reading Rescue, Great Leaps, S.P.I.R.E Program and Wilson reading Fundations programs. Fountas and Pinnell assessment program is used to se a goal for reading fluency and text comprehension. ELLs are also assessed with on-going informal and pre- and post- unit study assessments in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The progress from NYSESLAT/NYSITELL, annual standardized exam reports, MoSL, and informal assessments such as portfolios are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of needs in reading and writing modalities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The annual summative assessments and EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) are used to determine and address interventions for all students including ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 198 uses the collected data to provide the instructions for students including ELLs for more targeted and intensive academic instructions in ELA, Social Studies and Mathematics. For each ELL who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual assessment, P.S. 198 RTI team will determine the additional services to provide the student when it is presented by the classroom teachers to the RTI team in which will be aligned to any intervention plans. The RTI team also provides the strategies to implement in the classroom setting. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across proficiency levels (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math) show there are no ELLs who are still performing at a Entering Level after completing 3 years. ELLs at P.S. 198 have moved up at least one level. This data is consistent with research that states Basis Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) can develop within 0-3 years and Cognitive Academic Language Skills (CALP) develop in approximately 5-7 years. EDAT, student's artifacts, attendance, and grade assessments are used to evaluate ELL performance. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher gathered the information and ELLs are grouped according to the language proficiency level according to NYSITELL/NYSESLAT and NYS ELA. The ENL schedule is shared with all teachers. Expanding and Commanding ELLs are used for a peer mentor and a buddy translator for new comers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 198 has a Freestanding ENL Program. The program reflects the standalone ENL and the integrated ENL model of instruction with mixed proficiency levels with two consecutive grades. The each ENL session follows a 50 minute period to minimize any conflict with the service providers. Students may have a double block session where they stay for two consecutive periods. All students in Entering and Emerging levels based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction, and Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction as mandated. Entering and Emerging level ELLs have more time in the standalone ENL instruction. But in case of when there is a large group of ELLs in one classroom, the ENL teacher follows the integrated ENL model. A dually certified ENL teacher in TESOL and common branch will provide both the stand alone ENL an integrated ENL instructions to all ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 51  We do not have this program. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have this program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs receive their mandated minutes of services according to CR-Part 154. ELLs at Entering and Emerging levels will receive 360 minutes ENL instruction per week. Students receive the standalone model instruction in a separate room. ELLs at Transitioning and Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of E NL/ELA instruction per week as mandated. ELLs at Commanding level will receive 90 munites of ENL/ELA instruction per week. All ELLs are provided with their mandated minutes based on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT proficiency levels either in the standalone and/or integrated ENL model. Students may receive both the standalone and integrated ENL model instructions according to their language proficiency levels. Dually certified teacher in TESOL and Common Branch will provide ENL/ELA instructions. P.S. 198 does not provide Native Language Arts however, the ENL teacher provides 25% of native language support to the students when it is necessary with bilingual staff and resources such as dictionary, bilingual books, bilingual glossaries. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program at P.S. 198 is modeled greatly on the Balanced Literacy approach being used in mainstream classrooms combined with ENL strategies and to aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards . Examples of Balanced Literacy components in place within ENL lessons include Shared Reading, Shared Writing, Interactive Writing, Read-Alouds. ENL methodologies combined within include TPR (Total Physical Response), use of scaffolding, visuals, modeling, manipulatives, and acting out. TPR is used within the instruction to support learning of ELLs during the instructions. Practice with alphabet letters and sound correlation (building upon and improving phonemic awareness) in order to build words in writing and strengthen reading skills. Read-Alouds are used to model fluency with emphasis in deciphering meaning from text and introducing new vocabulary or concepts. Shared Reading including big books is utilized to focus on different strategies for reading, word patterns, rhyming, repetition. The ENL program also follows thematic unit in social studies, science and math. ELLs are supported in learning content and academic language with strong scaffolding, modeling, building upon prior knowledge, and using tools to help analyze information such as graphic organizers. The ENL instruction is delivered through the content of Social Studies or Science. The Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence are used when planning lessons/units. There is a focus on developing vocabulary, comprehension skills, fluency, grammar, and language structure within content area. Students will be provided with a variety of texts for a balanced literacy. All instruction is given in English with the support of dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, bilingual materials, and bilingual staff when needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have any proper way to assess at this point, however we are constantly looking for better way to assess students in their home languages. P.S. 198 has native language print materials available to students. The ENL classroom has bilingual story books (Spanish, Chinese, Japanese, Arabic, Urdu ). The bilingual staff are available to assist ELLs and translated services are provided to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language. Students are provided with opportunities to utilize bilingual books, dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, internet with their native language, and native language peers and staff. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 52  P.S. 198 provides differentiated instruction for ELL subgroups. We offer programs for students (including ELLs that are Newcomer ELLs and ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service) such as ENL After School academic enrichment program, Nessy, and Wilson program . There is an emphasis on small group work with on-going assessments for ELL subgroups. a. SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) SIFE students are not present at the time, however we will implement the following plan for any future SIFE students. The ENL teacher would meet with the parents with translation made available in the family’s native language to determine and discuss the programs to support their language learning process through such as Title III ENL After school programs, Extended Day Test Prep, Marymount Homework help, etc. b. Newcomer ELLs in US schools less than three years are provided with ENL services based on proficiency level. Students are offered Title III ENL After school programs to enrich their language skills and to be prepared for ELA and NYSESLAT testing that they are required to take with testing accommodations. ENL services are provided in a small group where the ENL teacher can give more attention to individual needs. c. Developing Students who have been receiving E N L services for 4-6 years are provided with support in language development through Title III ENL After school programs to assist in reading and as well as in writing. These students will also continue to receive ENL services to enhance their reading and writing strategies. d. Long Term The plan for long term ELLs (completed 6 years of ENL services) involves gathering assessment data on the student between the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. The teachers would confer with each other to analyze what the student’s current performance in language skills and address the student’s need to assist them to progress toward progress in proficiency level. These students will also be provided Title III After-school programs to assist in achieving proficiency in NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher will closely monitor any long term ELLs in identifying their language proficient needs. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status, the ENL teacher communicates regularly with classroom teachers to monitor and discuss students’ progress through their strength and weakness in building academic language and understanding in content areas such as Science and Mathematics. Classroom teachers also provide a small group instruction to assist all ELLs if needed. Students who are former ELLs for less than two years will receive testing accommodations. Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of the integrated ENL services. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identifies as having special needs are being served as per their IEPs. All ELL-SWD are provided with small group and/or one-to-one instruction , one-on-one assessments and differentiated instruction, and grade specific content resources and materials. All students use iPad with different apps to assist the needs of each students and use SMARTboard to support the students' needs. All ELL-SWDs will receive ENL services and other mandated support services by their IEP. The ENL teacher communicates regulary with classroom teachers and any service providers to monitor and discuss students' progress and their needs to implement within instructions. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD students may also receive SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Services and/or may be placed in an Integrated Co-teaching class). On-going team meetings involving classroom teacher, ENL teacher, other service providers (SETSS teacher, Speech Pathologist, Occupational Therapist, etc.) and parents are encouraged. All ELL-SWD are provided with small group and/or one-to-one instruction, one-on-one assessments and differentiated instruction, and grade specific content resources and materials. Teachers use TC curriculum with UDL approach to deliver the lesson objectives and goals to support 2018-19 CEP 53  students with IEP and language acquisition. The ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and service providers confer with each other to provide instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies include academic intervention in the form of small group pull-out and push-in, and After school ENL program. Although all services are provided in English, native language resources are available if needed. ELLs-SWD are provided with instructional support as per IEP. ELLs are provided support in reading comprehension, writing strategies, grammar, and acquiring vocabulary based on their individual needs. Students are engaged in Reading Rescue, Fundations small group instruction, literacy intervention groups, reading small group with Learning Leaders. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A program being considered for the school year is a "buddy program" between and ELL who has reached Expanding and Commanding and Entering and Emerging level ELL of a shared home language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students including ELLs are afforded equal access to after school and supplemental services in the building. The Title III ENL After School program s are designed to assist students in learning language skills through using four learning modalities, for example, after school program using Arts from Around the World unit to learn different cultures to build strong school community with hands-on activities. ELLs also participate in school wide activities including Ballroom Dancing, Rosie’s Kids, Yoga, Chess, Science Fair, SciTech Kids, Student Council, Young People's Chorus , Marymount Homework Help, Robotics, Story Pirates, Sounds in Motion, Creative Stages, and Corbin's Sports Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials and technology to support ELLs include books on tape/CD, leveled books similar to that found in their classroom library, multicultural read-aloud books for Shared Reading, bilingual books and dictionaries, dry erase boards for interactive writing, vocabulary, grammar, comprehension, and language structure games, writing journals, iPad interactive language learning games is used as an informal assessment tool . In all classrooms and Technology class, all ELLs have the opportunity to use computers, SMART boards, and engage in computer based literacy programs and activities such as Nessy, BrainPopJr., Turtle Diary with captions. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered when possible in our ENL program and in all class instructions. We provide bilingual books for ELLs and parents of ELLs. A "buddy" is encouraged between newcomers and a partner with a shared home language to assist with translation and vocabulary development. P.S. 198 does not provide Native Language Arts however, the ENL teacher provides native language support to the students when it is necessary with bilingual staff and resources such as dictionary, bilingual books, bilingual glossaries. All ELLs receive their mandated minutes of services according to CR-Part 154. ELLs at Entering and Emerging levels will receive 360 minutes ENL instruction per week. Students receive the pull-out model instruction in a separate room. ELLs at Transitioning and Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of E NL/ELA instruction per week as mandated. ELLs at Commanding level will receive 90 munites of ENL/ELA instruction per week. All ELLs are provided with their mandated minutes based on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT proficiency levels either in the standalone or integrated ENL model. Students receive both the standalone and integrated ENL model instructions according to their language proficiency levels. Dually certified teacher in TESOL and Common Branch will provide ENL/ELA instructions. 2018-19 CEP 54  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources are provided to ELLs according to their appropriate grade level and language proficiency level according to NYSESLAT result. Grade level content is delivered to ELLs with reading materials at the students’ language proficiency level through shared reading, guided reading, turn and talk strategy, etc. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 198 shares a building space with P.S. 77. The administrations from both schools schedule the time for gym, yard, cafeteria, and auditorium. The school-wide events (such as student council, Green team, International Nights, etc.) are planned to involve students from both schools to ensure the opportunity to learn about the coexistence and sharing of a building space. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We assist newly enrolled ELL students prior to (June and August) and after the start of the school year by offering an orientation to our school, meet with teacher, and receive materials in home languages. We also offer school tours throughout the school year by the Parent coordinator. All newly enrolled students and parents including ELLs are invited to a school event "Meet and Greet" prior to the start of the school year. Staff are encouraged to involve in any school-wide events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 198 does not offer any foreign language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher is offered to attend PDs provided by the Manhattan Field Support Center and DELLSS. ALL teachers including the ENL teacher is encouraged to attend summer learning opportunities and conferences provided by DOE and DELLSS, as well as joining Webinars in supporting and instructing ELLs to align instructions with CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 198 encourages teachers to participate in on-going professional development workshops and seminars. Out of school Professional Development, as well as in-house PDs are provided on topics such as differentiating instruction for all students including ELLs. Teachers are encouraged to participate in PD planning and Teacher Team meeting sessions where they can share strategies and plan instruction for students including ELLs. Currently P.S. 198 meets with Professional Learning Teams every Monday and Tuesday afternoon. Each professional learning team works in different areas such as UDL to promote 2018-19 CEP 55  intellectual engagement, social emotional learning opportunities and strategies, effective small group in math, technology, CCLS and writing instruction and pre-K teams, to enhance teaching instructions. All staff including ENL teacher, Special Education teachers, Common Branch teachers, school secretary, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, social worker and paraprofessionals are encouraged to attend PDs provided by the district on different content areas such as literacy, technology, and DOE protocols and regulations. A literacy consultant also provides professional learning opportunities for all teachers with teaching strategies for ELLs. PDs targeted for ELL students are provided by the MFSC for ENL teacher and other staff including service providers (Occupational Therapist, Physical Therapist, Speech Pathologist, Guidance Counselor, etc.) and Paraprofessionals to ensure the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2. The School Secretary keeps the record of teachers’ PD hours on file. School will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that addresses the needs of ELLs including language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. All teachers are encouraged to participate in after-school study group to share information to strengthen and support student learning. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers including the ENL teacher meet with the parents/guardians of ELLs at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, ELL parent orientation or other scheduled meetings, to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress and needs in all content areas. Parents are encouraged to use Parent Engagement time on every Tuesday afternoon to discuss their child's progress in school. Parents are contacted via email, phone calls, note, etc. Translation services including a translator/interpreter, over-the-phone interpretation services provided by DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used if needed. Copies of all meeting records including sign-in sheet, agenda, etc. are kept in school file. An individual meeting records are kept with the designated staff. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to ELL Parent Orientation, we also provide workshops for parents of ELLs. We conduct several meetings each with a specific focus to meet the needs of the parents include reading and writing strategies, NYSESLAT review, and general information on language acquisition and ways to help students at home. In addition, parents contribute in selecting topics for upcoming workshops to ensure that their needs are being met. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to join the School Parent Association to help plan events and collaborate with administrators and teachers. In addition to Curriculum Morning in September and Parent-Teacher Conferences in Fall and Spring, Family Night in May, teachers communicate with parents via newsletters, emails, phone calls, and meetings on a regular basis. Parent involvement is strongly encouraged at P.S. 198 through monthly PTA meeting, volunteering, school activities (international Night, Mystery Reader), and meet with other parents and members of the community. All notices including flyers are sent home in the parents’ preferred language such as a native language when available. We also use translation services provided by DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Interpretation services are provided by bilingual staff members, parent volunteers or teachers when needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Please note: 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Katharine Macmanus, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Straus School School DBN: 02M198 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Katharine Macmanus Principal Linda Shkreli Assistant Principal Danielle Santana Parent Coordinator Minjung Jamie Kim ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Karen Bugden Other SETSS n/a n/a Other Other 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M198 School Name: Straus School Superintendent: Bonnie Leboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Minjung Jamie Kim ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S. 198, we use the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey). Parent’s primary language is noted and the data from the HLIS is recorded into ATS. The HLIS is given in the native language and an interpreter assists if needed. All forms have the English and their native language translations to ensure interpretation of the information. ATS generated reports are used to assess the needs of the parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 366 79.39 361 78.31 2018-19 CEP 60  Japanese Spanish Chinese 26 29 10 5.64 6.29 2.17 26 30 10 5.64 6.51 2.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Japanese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Principal's newsletters September/October After school program information November NYSESLAT Late April Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE Translation and Interpretation Services with 2-3 week turnaround time DOE Translation and Interpretation Services with 2-3 week turnaround time Translated documents can be found in NYSED website 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher conferences November/March Curriculum Night IEP meetings September Through out the year interpretation service(s)? DOE Over-the-phone Interpretation Services Bilingual Staff Bilingual Staff DOE Over-the-phone Interpretation Services 2018-19 CEP 61  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Bilingual staff, bilingual volunteer/parents, Th and DOE over-the-phone interpretation services will be use in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator turn-keys important information to teachers and staff on translation and interpretation services for parents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 198 will adhere to the regulation A-663 regarding parent notification by ensuring registration forms are available in their native language. Parents are provided with the discipline policy and school safety procedures. The school’s Language Access Coordinator along with parent coordinator and ENL teacher are working together with all staff to ensure that parents/guardians are informed about translation services available to them at school and through the Department of Education Website. All general notification documents can be found at http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At P.S. 198, we use the parent preferred language survey and HLIS to gather information and feedback from parents to meet their needs. The ENL teacher uses Parent Engagement time on every Tuesdays from 2:20 - 3:00 P.M. to provide informal and formal meetings and information sessions to all ELL parents, but scheduled programs and upon request. 2018-19 CEP 62 
