2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M217 School Name: P.S./I.S. 217 ROOSEVELT ISLAND Principal: MANDANA BECKMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Roosevelt Island School 02M217 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310200010217 Pre K-8 th grade 645 Main Street 212-980-0294 School Number (DBN): 212-980-1192 Fax: Mandana Beckman Mbeckma@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Mandana Beckman Corey Luce Tracey DeBenedictis ShiraRubenstin N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Ave, 7 th Floor, NY, NY 10001 BLaboy2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3815 Phone Number: 212-356-3702 Fax: District 2 Manhattan Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8 th Floor, NY, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shira Rubenstein Ursula Fokine Jodi Shuster Member/School Member/School Member/School 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Mandana Beckman Corey Luce Tracey DeBenedictis N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Ben Torrance Dimaura Cole Josie Chamla Will Sweeney N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Provide students with meaningful opportunities and experiences that strengthen their academic, social and emotional capacity Respect differences, embrace diversity to foster unity and inspire community 2018-19 CEP 9  Immerse students in computer science and the arts- visual, music, dance and theater Develop collaboration and independence through small group work and partnerships Engage and nurture students through a whole child approach 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 217 is a District 2 zoned PreK through Grade 8 school, located on Roosevelt Island. We focus on the individual learner through standards-based curricula and enrichment in the arts, sciences and other areas. By developing students' mindsets, essential skills and habits, we inspire them to become well rounded citizens who think critically, act responsibility and embrace differences! With the support of the PTA, we are proud of the many partnerships and enrichment opportunities available to our students. We continue to partner with Cornell Tech (CT) and will be entering the second year of a teacher in residence 1 day a week from CT supporting our teacher's implementation of computer science in all grades. We are also part of the DOE's Elementary Software Engineering Program (SEP Jr.) and were a pilot school in 16-17. At 217 we have developed a core set of beliefs on how students learn best. We incorporate these beliefs into all aspects of the school day. We also believe in character education; highlighting and teaching a trait per month in assemblies, having classroom lessons, and celebrating with a book of the month. We pride ourselves on our goal setting and cycle of monitoring, evaluating, reflecting and revising. We believe a strength of our PreK through Grade 8 school is the cohesive grade teams and vertical alignment. We are a highly collaborative faculty. Staff engage in meaningful cross grades Inquiry work of choice each year that impact student achievement. We are entering our fifth year with our School-Wide Improvement Teams (SWIT): School Culture, Parental Engagement, Sustainability, Community Service and Homework and are "re-visioning" these teams to meat our current needs in the school. It is our continued goal that these teams further involve families, students and the greater community to ensure that our vision is living daily at 217. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school includes approximately 17% English Language Learners and 11% of our students have Individual Education Plans, IEPs. Special needs are individualized to each student depending on present levels of performance, strengths, areas of concern and level of English proficiency for (ENL students), country and school exposure, level of proficiency in the student's home language and the families commitment to supporting their student. Needs may refer to academic supports and access, translation, or adaptive equipment. Our schools Gifted and Talented Program, a K to 5 program is open to District 2 and District 30 in Queens. Our G&T program is an enriched curriculum but like all classes at 217, the teaching and tasks are differentiated to meet individual needs. We believe students learn best when they all have the appropriate access, supports and challenges. This is based on classroom data. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  PS/IS 217 is committed to the Framework for Great Schools and we pride ourselves on our high standards for all: school leaders, staff, students, and families and our commitment to continual improvement. We continue our reflective process consistently assessing needs, utilizing multiple data sources, setting goals, monitoring and measuring against benchmarks, evaluating, reflecting and revising. We use this same process to examine all elements of the framework. We met all of our CEP goals from 2017-18. We are proud of our work in Rigorous Instruction. Our belief about how students learn best and our investment in professional development has proven to be effective. As per our 2017 State Exams, student proficiency in both ELA and Math was up to 65% from spring 2017 exams. This year our ELA is up to 72% proficiency and math is up to 67% proficiency. We continue to improve and have now shifted our Rigorous Instruction goal to focus on math. Our staff through their end of the year reflection again this year identified the work in the area of collaborative teachers as an area of strength and one they are particularly proud of that has impacted their practice and student achievement. 100% PS/IS 217 staff participated in intravisitations to enhance their practice and impact student achievement. All staff participated in a minimum of one intravisitation tied to their inquiry study of personal choice in order to create a "Bridge to Practice." These teams researched and tried out different pedagogical practices to find the most effective. Teams have created resources and additional vertical practices have resulted based on their findings. We know all areas of the framework are essential and they work together to impact students. Our key areas of focus for 2018-19 lie within strong family and community ties and rigorous instruction. Our next steps to "revision" and strengthen school wide improvement teams so they are meeting current school needs as well as involving parents, the community, and students. During the 2017-18 school year we began to implement new practices in mathematics to strength student achievement that will be a focus of 18-19. We also hope to increase parent/guardian attendance at Family Engagement during the school day events. Upon evaluating the parent engagement policy of number of classroom visits for each grade from the 2016-17 school year, average attendance in K and 1 was 54%, in Grade 2 it was 46%, in Grade 3 it was 43%, in grade 4, 36%, in grade 5, 22% and in Middle School under 10%. The most attended event in every grade was open school week, when parents observe instruction. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M217 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 616 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 16 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 43 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 34.0% % Attendance Rate 29.7% % Reduced Lunch 16.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 14.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 38.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.08 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 35 35 95.0% 3.9% 11.5% 11.4% 30.0% 5.2% 2 3% 6.2 67.0% 50% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following strengths have been identified following a comprehensive needs assessment:  217 has clear, focused school goals and we track progress. PPO, 03/2018  Across all classrooms teaching practices reflect a set of beliefs for how students learn best. We received a well developed on indicator 1.2, Pedagogy on the Quality Review, 02/2018.  Performance on State ELA and Math Exams for 2017 increased to 65% proficiency in ELA and 65% in math - School Quality Snapshot 2016-17  According to the Framework for Great Schools key on the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshop, 217 was rated "Excellent" in the area of Rigorous Instruction.  During our end of year grade team reflection survey, staff identified RI as an area of strength citing specifically we continue tp have high expectations of students, set rigorous goals and achieve the goals. The work within RI is supported by strong grade teams, curricula and continues professional development and work with consultants. Special areas teachers also utilize student data and compliment the curricula.  Met CEP goal 2017-18 - By June of 2018, 68% of all students will be reading on or above grade level as measured by the F&P or DRP assessment. While increasing student reading proficiency continues to be a priority (proficiency according to the State ELA exam from Spring 2018 is 72%) and an area we will continue to collect and monitor school wide data to inform instructional decisions, since in order for students to be successful, they must be able to access complex grade level text, we will also focus on mathematical procedural skills and fluency for the 2018-19 school year across K to 8. Our State data from 2018 shows that 67% of our students are proficient in mathematics. We know according to the instructional shifts that the standards call for speed and accuracy in calculation. Students must practice core functions, in order to have access to more complex concepts and procedures. Fluency must be addressed in the classroom through supporting materials. Teachers must regularly collect and analyze data in order to align student need and this work so that it is meaningful and impacts student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019, 100% all grade teams, Kindergarten through Middle School, will collect fluency data for all students in a uniform manner to analyze and identify trends for grades, classes, groups of students and individuals, which will be utilized in planning and visiable in lesson plans as well as setting student goals to impact student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each K to 8 teacher of math will take baseline data on fluency All teachers and students September and October Consultant supports All classroom teachers of math - observation, team meetings, model assessment administration if needed After baseline data has been collected, by Novmeber benchmark day All classroom teachers with consultant support - show exemplars, teachers try out different systems to see which works better and share, discuss pros/cons All classroom teachers with consultant support - model as needed, grade team meetings with consultant and admin Grade teams with consultant support to model and debrief as needed Decemeber through June Benchmark days in February and May, end of year data collection in May and June Grade teams will meet to put grade level data together and meet in cross grades groups to ensure the format is meaningful, useable - creating a new consistent school-wide approach to collecting math data all K to MS teams in groups Grade levels will analyze fluency data and within lesson plans indicate data and next steps and set goals for groups of students all teachers of math Grade levels will utilize benchmark days to reflect on data, revise data collection practices, analyze trends and collect end of year data to measure growth all teachers of math 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share data with parents at parent teacher conferences (November and March) and as students progress through levels, teachers will inform parents of progress (interval assessments vary by grade level). Students will know their fluency goals and homework/class work will be individualized to support goals which will be shared with parents. Teachers hold mini workshops to help parents understand the math and strategies throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Consultants and staff to support fluency assessment and instruction and additional teacher Professional Development (PD) Fluency resources/games - continue to purchase and organize resources Intervention teachers and RtI/SETSS push in    After school and Saturday math academies to further support student achievement, persession  Computer/Technology supports  All grade levels have been scheduled for common prep time  Schedules are adjusted as needed for consultant observation and grade meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, 100% of teachers will have baseline data and grade teams will combine data to analyze. By March, 85% of teachers will have fluency data within lesson plans and goals for students in a uniform manner. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ECAM, Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics, Screeners, Iready, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Following a needs assessment, the following strengths have been identified:  The schools approach to culture building and social-emotional support results in a safe environment and inclusive culture that is conducive to student and adult learning. PPO 2017  The school communicates clear expectations connected to college and career readiness, PPO 2018  3.4 Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations and 1.4 maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes were identified as a well developed areas - QR 2018  PBIS has existed for eight years but continues to positively support students' behavior and social growth by teaching life skills/character traits.  We are meeting targets in Supportive Environment as per the School Quality Guide 2016-17  Staff identify our supportive environment classroom lessons as a highlight of the school year contributing to a positive and safe school culture.  According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 we earned a score of 3.93 in supportive environment, in 2016, our school had a score of 3.46 in this area of the framework.  Overall Advance data from the Danielson Competencies for the entire staff from 2017-18 observations show that 88% of staff are effective or highly effective in managing student behavior and creating an environment of respect and rapport. School culture and community impact student learning and therefore remains a priority at 217. Part of our mission is Respect differences, embrace diversity to foster unity and inspire community and to Engage and nurture the whole child. We have invested a great deal of time and resources to this priority area - hiring an f-status teacher to lead weekly assemblies for grade levels on social/emotional learning and life skills, initiating books of the month across all grades, following the PBIS structure, having a Dare to Care store and Middle School field trips. School culture has been one of our School-wide Improvement Teams for the past five years. We believe social, emotional and behavioral support are essential for academic success and students must be taught the academic and personal behaviors necessary to be college and career ready. Following a whole staff reflection and PD on school culture the staff identified key areas for improvement. We want to continue our classroom lessons tailored to meet the needs of each particular class and make more connections and collaborations between younger and older students within the school community a priority since we are a PreK through Grade 8 school. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 17  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will participate in bimonthly instruction around life skills/ academic and personal behaviors and empathy, lessons tailored to the needs of the individual class (or small groups within a class) thereby building school community, culture and trust and all students will participate in a minimum of 3 activities/events/lessons partnering younger and older students together to build community. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PreK through Grade 8 teachers will develop class rules and routines with students. Community building activities will be presented regularly at the beginning of the year for all students. We will continue the book of the month and monthly themes. Teachers will determine ways to assess and keep track of the needs in the classroom in order to tailor lessons to meet their needs and assess the effectiveness. Pre- K to 5 teachers including students with disabilities and ENL students, will attend Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports cross grade weekly assemblies 2x per month and provide classroom instruction (teacher created lessons) to transfer these skills - lesson will be tailored to individual classes and groups of students and address specific areas of need. Grades 6 - 8 will continue weekly advisory lessons. These are mixed grade groups including ENL and students with IEPs. Staff will develop ways to assess the impact and effectiveness of these lessons. Teachers will identify and collaborate across grades in order to provide students with meaningful opportunities to interact. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff September All Staff Monthly K to 5 teachers and students, 6-8 studens and advisors Student support Staff, School counselor, classroom teachers, administration support All classroom teachers and students 3 times during the year classroom teachers with support of School-wide Improvement Teams Teacher School-Wide Improvements Teams - School Culture, Community, Sustainability, Community Service will collaborate. Teachers Monthly meetings Staff members on these teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school communicates via weekly teacher newsletter and monthly school (LINKS) and PTA newsletters. We envision family engagement as parents and school collaborating to support students, not just as parents attending classroom events. Parents will engage with students within the school culture and community teams. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. F Statue teacher leading PBIS cross grade assemblies   Dare to Care store resources/Middle School events and trips  Curriculum and student resources for life skills, academic and personal behavior, and empathy lessons  Teacher common planning time    Books of the month and other resources to support classroom lessons  Resources - to be determined by teachers according to class need School Wide Improvement Teams - scheduled PD time Scheduling adjustments for older and younger grade classrooms to meet/collaborate Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, 90% of students will have taken part in 4 lessons and 1 across grade activity. By March 2019, 90% of students will have taken part in 14 lessons and 2 within or across grades activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collection tool created in Google Docs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following strengths have been identified in this area:  The 16-17 School Quality Guide showed a score of 4.81 in the area of Collaborative Teachers, .72 above the district average and 1.24 above the city average.  Collaborative Teachers is rated as "Exceeding Target" - School Quality Guide 2016-17  96% of teachers responded positively to "how well do teachers work together?" (above the city and district %) School Survey/Quality Snapshot 2016-17  Teachers are engaging in structured professional collaborations that connect to school goals - PPO Spring 2018  During the 2017-18 school year, over 55% of the staff engaged in at least 4 intravisitations, and over 94% of staff participated in at least 3 intravisitations.  Teachers meet in grade teams, content teams, vertical teams, School Implementation Team, School Leadership Team, as a whole faculty, in Professional Learning Committees and Inquiry groups. The "Bridge to Practice" that has come out of this professional learning is evident through observations and the vertical alignment of best practices. Teachers plan together, support one another, and share resources.  4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development was rated Well Developed on the 2018 Quality Review citing "teachers meat regularly to discuss problems of practice, collaborate and share their practice."  According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, 100% of teachers say they trust each other. Our priority is to continue to enhance teacher collaboration through multiple teams and the inquiry model and to connect inquiry learning directly to classroom practice to impact student achievement and that all of our work creates cohesive practices within a grade and vertical alignment across grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of classroom teachers will participate in an inquiry project of choice resulting in an artifact or structure/practice to be adopted schoolwide with at least 2 intervisitations tied to the inquiry project that impacts student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will collaborate to develop intravisitation norms and protocol to be used during the 2018-2019 school year as well as PD around the inquiry cycle. Teachers will participate in PD around effective teams. Classroom teachers By mid -October Teachers and Admin Staff will identify an area of focus from their inquiry work and collaborate weekly in inquiry teams during "Other Professional Work Time" to identify and conduct their study. Classroom and support staff Staff will follow the inquiry cycle and utilize data to inform decisions. Teachers By beginning of October and February October through May Staff will participate in intravisitions with consultants, coaches, admin, and self-initiate and record this work. Teachers By May Staff will share inquiry projects and resources Teachers May and June Teacher and Admin Teachers and admin Teachers, Consultants Teachers and Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as learning partners will participate in school/classroom visits. We will highlight inquiry work in the LINKs newsletter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Time to collaborate as a staff and devise the norms/protocol -Time for staff to turn key professional learning -Per Diem teacher coverage as needed 2018-19 CEP 22  -Teacher prep time and sub coverage as needed -Consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% staff will completed a minimum of 1 intravisitation related to inquiry. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Intravisitation recording tool, Google Docs log will be created and maintained. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Following a needs assessment, the below strengths were identified:  High expectations are communicated to staff. PPO Spring 2017  Across all classrooms, teaching practices reflect a set of beliefs of how students learn best. PPO spring 2017  According to the School Quality Guide, 2016-17, Effective School Leadership earned a score of 4.06, +.32 compared to the district and +.63 compared to the city.  According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, 97% of teachers say they trust the principal.  All Advance observations are completed in a timely manner with all staff having a meeting to debrief all observations prior to receiving written feedback. Staff and admin, regardless of MOTP engage in Individual Planning Conference (IPC), Mid and End of Year reflective meetings around goals. Teacher Professional Development is informed by the observation process.  Distributive Leadership is embedded according to the 2018 Quality Review. 4.2 Earned a Well Developed.  3.4, High Expectations earned a Well Developed on the 2018 Quality Review. The reviewer cited the multiple best practice guides and expectations guides, data and progress tracking, our work in Computer Science and partnership with Cornell Tech, and supports to parents and students the school makes available.  The area of effective leadership is "excellent" according to the School Quality Snapshot, 2016-17  According to Advance data for 2016-2017, out of 604 competencies rated, 490, over 80% were effective or highly effective  As per the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, we are exceeding targets in this domain and 84% (above the city average) responded positively to the question How clearly are high expectations communicated to students and staff. Teachers and administrators will continue to partner to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. All teachers will continue to lead IPCs, mid and end of year meetings and participate in reflective observation feedback conversations after each observation. For the past two years our focus competencies have been 3b, questioning and discussion and 3d, assessment. Data shows that both areas have been areas of growth. According to 2017-18 Advance data, in 3b, over 72% of the staff earned effective or highly effective and 3d, assessment, 80% earned effective or highly effective. Next steps are for us to focus as a staff on 3c, Engaging students in learning where in 17-18 67% of staff earned an effective or highly effect rating. This competency encompasses groupings, the actual activity or assignment, structure and pacing, and materials and resources. We also have 7 new staff member this year. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, according to MOTP data, 71% of staff evaluated through Advance, will be effective in 3c, Engaging students in learning in order to impact student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Teachers will reflect on 3c and incorporate aspects of 3c into professional goals during their IPCs with Admin All classroom teachers September IPCs Admin and teachers After school and during the day PD will be completed within 3c - creating a shared understanding of engagement. We will use resources provided by the District and from our JESA visits. Teachers will share practice and resources within and across grades and discuss 3c during common planning time in order to norm practice. Staff will reflect of growth in 3c and set goals for 19-20 Teachers and Admin October - May Teachers, Admin and Consultants All classroom teachers October - May Classroom teachers, Consultants All staff and administration June 2019 All staff and Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will highlight our high standards in report cards (November and March), at conferences and within weekly newsletters. We will continue to keep parents informed of curriculum highlights weekly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Student data  DOE Advance resources   Consultants and Coach  Professional literature  PD time/common planning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 60% of staff evaluated with Advance with be effective in engaging student in learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance website for tracking 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS/IS 217 is committed to supporting our students academically, socially, emotionally and behaviorally and we know that a family/community and school partnership is the most effective way to make that happen. The following strengths have been identified:  All PreK to 5 teachers send weekly newsletters with curriculum highlights and updates. Middle school sends this monthly.  According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot 95% responded positively to the question How well does the school partner with families? And 94% of parents say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them. LINKS is a school newsletter sent monthly PreK to 8   Our school uses the Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) framework to support students.  We provide At-Risk or Tier 1 and Tier 2 services for academics and when possible students receive at-risk counseling. We have prioritized to have 2 part time student support service teachers.  Our PTA and SLT work collaboratively with administration and teachers to support students and school goals  Teachers hold 1 grade level workshop and 1 miniclass workshop to assist parents and students with curriculum and strategy understanding.  During the 2016-2017 school year, each grade level held a specific number of during the school day parent activities, in which parents were invited into the classroom. After evaluating the 5 School wide Improvement teams we have had for the past four years at 217, we identified that parents and the community were not knowledgeable about the work of these teams. Few teams were able to successfully involve parents during the 2017-18 school year. For the 2018-19 school year we have created 6 teams with the goal of 1 team specifically to link parents and the community into these teams. We will continue our efforts in SwITs and work to include our students, families and the community so that all stakeholders are informed and included. Upon evaluating the parent engagement policy of number of classroom visits for each grade from the 2017-18 school year, average attendance in K and 1 was 54%, in Grade 2 it was 46%, in Grade 3 it was 43%, in grade 4, 36%, in grade 5, 22% and in Middle School under 10%. The most attended event in every grade was open school week, when parents observe teaching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 28  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each grade/class will hold a minimum of 2 parent engagement activities in which the attendance rate is at least 55%. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Admin will provide grade levels with a target number of parent engagement activities - different for each grade level Staff/Admin September All staff - admin /Families determine number of events based on feedback from PTA and previous attendance data, grade teams determine which events All staff - PTA to assist with communication Grade teams will determine what activities will be provided and when and give parents a minimum of 2 months notice for each activity Staff/Admin /Families October, December, February, April Staff/Admin By May All Staff Teachers, class parents, the PTA, Parent Coordinator will outreach to parents to attend events. Teachers will plan meaningful activities. /Families Staff will collect feedback from parents to inform next steps/revisions to parent engagement plan. staff/admin/families By May. All staff. .. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . . . If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Grade level Enrichments sponsored by the PTA New CBO/Beacon partnership SwIT communication with parents and students events 2018-19 CEP 30  Newsletters Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PD time devoted to SwITs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 100% of the School-wide Improvement Teams will have presented updates to SLT and included parents/students at least once (for example: conduct surveys, interviews, workshops, present a PTA meetings).. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SwITs will keep a google docs of all minutes and evidence of work with students, families and the community. SLT has minutes taken by the secretary. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During and after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) This varies based on individual need. Often interventions are: Fundations, see-say sight word multisensory instruction, guided reading, Great Leaps, F&P Leveled Literacy Intervention Kit, repeated readings, interactive writing, etc. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students are assessed ongoing throughout the school year using F&P and DRPas benchmarks. Students that fall in the bottom 1/3 are monitored and may be identified as Tier 1 students. Tier 1 are students that will receive targeted interventions within the school day, within the classroom by the classroom teacher. Member of the SIT team may consult. A PIP (Personal Intervention Plan 1) is developed and monitored. If a student is not making adequate response to intervention services then the student is recommended for Tier 2 services. Tier 2 are provided outside of the classroom by a special education teacher or AIS provider. Benchmark 2018-19 CEP 32 small group During and after school This varies depending upon individual need: ECAM centers, Screeners, problem solving strategies, skill fluency Mathematics assessments are used throughout the year. Students in Grades 4-8 with a level 1 on the 2018 State Exam will be provided intervention as well as any Hold Over student. All students are assessed ongoing throughout the school year using ECAM, Screeners, Unit/Grade tests. Students that fall in the bottom 1/3 are monitored and may be identified as Tier 1 students. Tier 1 are students that will receive targeted interventions within the school day, within the classroom by the classroom teacher. Member of the SIT team may consult. A PIP (Personal Intervention Plan 1) is developed and monitored. If a student is not making adequate response to intervention services then the student is recommended for Tier 2 services. Tier 2 are provided outside of the classroom by a special education teacher orAISprovider. Students in Grades 4-8 with a level 1 on the 2018 State Exam will be provided intervention as well 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) as Hold Over Studenets. As needed – Tier 1 only As needed – Tier 1 only Our guidance counselors, school psychologist, social worker and student support teachers see students as needed Skill and content work Skill and content work Social Emotional Work Small group During school Small group During school Small group During school 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are not a title 1 school. We are not a title 1 school Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). According to the RATH (ATS Temporary Housing Address Report) we have 9 students "doubled up," 2 students in "permanent housing status" and 1 student 2018-19 CEP 35 coded as "shelter." 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. We provide students with classroom supplies such as paper, pencils, notebooks, pens. When needed we will purchase books to read, entrance fees to trips and dues. Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor meets with the family. Check in's with the guidance counselor will be regularly scheduled. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. not title 1 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). not title 1 Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not title 1 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not title 1 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). not title 1 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. not title 1 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Roosevelt Island School, PS/IS 217l, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Roosevelt Island School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Roosevelt Island School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 2018-19 CEP 42  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 1 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We know that through consistent practice and reinforcement and time students will gain English proficiency. We believe that students need exposure and experience in science and social studies to increase their vocabulary and deepen their understanding of content. We are a K-8 school, but have a small number of ENL students at each grade level and at each performance level. We do have any long-term nor SIFE ENLs currently. We believe that ENLs learn best when they have the opportunity to transfer their learning to activities that reflect real life scenarios. We plan to work with ENLs in grade 2 and ENLs graders 3 and 4 who scored a level 1, 2 or 3 on the ELA exam. According to the FY18 ELA data 31% of the ELLs in grade 3 to 8 are proficient. In grade 3 9% are level 1, 45% are level 2 and 45% are level 3. In 4th grade 0% are level 1, 43% are level 2 and 43% are level 3%. We have selected 20 ENL students: Entering- 2/20 = 10%, Emerging-2/20 = 10%, Transitioning-2/20 = 10%, Expanding-12/20 = 60% and Commanding-2/20 = 10%. We plan to supplement instruction after school. In after-school the student will participate in Reader’s Theater and in Leveled Literacy Intervention. In Reader’s Theater the learning activities include: understanding instructions and following directions, working with others collaboratively, the usage of formal language vs. informal language, appropriate social and academic behavior in varying situations, communication, grammar, and the mastery of content based vocabulary and academic discourse. Students will create skits, stories and vocabulary decks and keep them in folders In leveled Literacy Intervention Students will be placed in groups according to Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. They will participate in a direct instruction on phonics and then will apply that to a guided reading, reading response and independent practice. They will practice literacy based reading skills and strategies. LLI/ Readers Theatre includes 20 students in grades 2- 4. In 2nd grade, there are 8 students, in 3rd grade, there are 5 students and 4th grade there are 7 students. In 2nd grade the proficiency levels are entering at 12 %, emerging at 12%, transitioning at 12% and expanding 64%. In 3rd grade, the proficiency levels are 20% at entering, 20% at emerging, 40% at expanding and 20% at commanding. Fourth-grade levels are proficiency is transitioning at 14%, expanding at 72 % and commanding at 14%. The students (grades 2,3,4) will be invited to after school for 1 hour per day for 3 days per week between October and June. The student groups are flexible between the two teachers. Students will spend half the hour with the ENL teacher then the second half of the hour with the common branch teacher. The program is 10 months October 2nd to June 21st, 3 days (Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday) per week from 3:00 to 4:00pm for 150 sessions total. The language of instruction is English. Students will be grouped based on ability in a ratio of 10 students to 1 teacher (ESL or Common Branch Teacher). There will be 2 groups. We will use Teacher Created materials and Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits to support literacy instruction. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL Teacher and the common branch teacher will meet weekly to unpack the lesson, teaching strategies and review students observations. Parents are invites to meet with the teacher on Tuesday morning before school. Parents will receive a follow up email about student progress and supports they can do as well. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Comprehension in reading and listening is critical for the success of ENL students. Our ENL teacher and Common branch teacher for Title III instruction will receive professional development from the Generation Ready Literacy Consultant. The PD will provide teachers with more information and best practice strategies to teach literacy through Readers Theater to ELLs. They will focus on: reading, writing, listening, and speaking techniques for ELLs, how to support various types of learners, aligning the Common Core Learning Standards to ESL teaching, text complexity and reading comprehension strategies. The impact of these PD session on ENL students will be on their listening, speaking and writing skills. There will be six 45 minute blocks of professional development provided to the ENL teacher between November and December. PD will be provided on November 7, 14, 28 and December 4, 11, 18. These PD sessions will cost $1326. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We support the parents of ELLs by providing a parent workshop on Saturdays. The data shows that 69% of the ENLS are not proficient in ELA. We have 2018 NYSESLAT data for whole school . The purpose of these sessions is to provide parents with conversational English that they can work with their child in helping them to succeed in an American school both emotionally and academically. Also, parents will be able to be more involved with the school, therefore opening lines of communication between staff, teachers and parents. The meetings for these workshops will be held Saturdays for 2 hours (9:00-11:00am) for 10 sessions. The workshops will be held November 3, November 17, December 1, December 15, January 12, January26, February 9, March 2, March 16, March 30. The workshops will be 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities facilitated by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher will be paid per session for facilitating these workshops to parents. Parents will receive a flyer with information about the workshops in order to register. The ENL teacher sends home notices in different languages to contact parents about these workshop opportunities. Materials include the Internet and Smartboard and newspaper articles. Topics for parents workshops have included: Helping Your Student with the English Language: Internet Resources to Make Home Connections; Reading Strategies to Help Students at Home; Writing Strategies to Help Students at Home, Support Learning according to the Common Core Standard, Reading Comprehension strategies, and Unpacking Your Child’s Curriculum. In addition, the school will also provide at least two workshops for the parents to focus on helping their students at home with English. Workshops titles include: "Literacy Help and Strategies at Home" and "Helping. Your Child With Math With a PS/IS 217 Twist", "Helping Unpack the NYSESLAT and Other State Exams". Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount $9098 per session for After School student programs (2 teachers X 75 sessions X 25 weeks X $60.65) $1213 for Parent Engagement (1 teachers x10 sessions x 2hours 60.65) $1326 $1326 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 70% -This is to cover the per session costs for ENL Teacher,Coach, General Ed Teacher for students after school. 10%- This is to cover the per session costs for ENL Teacher Parent Saturday program. This covers the cost for services by Generation Ready. 10% This covers the cost of Teacher Created materials – Consumable Supplies to cover Readers Theater. Index cards- 20 x$2.16= $43.20 Loose Leaf – 10x$11:22= $112.20 Construction paper- 30 x$18.38=$551.40 Pocket folders- 20x $17.22=$344.40 Sheet protector 6x$14.70=$88.20 N/A 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A 1,139.40 Other TOTAL N/A N/A 13,262 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name The Roosevelt Island School Borough Manhattan School Number 217 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mandana Beckman Coach Ursula Fokine ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rosemary Fung Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Eileen Lopez Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Jennifer Allen Coach type here School Counselor Jeffrey Gurwin Parent Erin Olavesen Parent Coordinator Lauraine Rademaker Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 583 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 111 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.04%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS/IS 217 uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess early literacy skills. Students instruction is based on F&P results. Students are placed into flexible literacy groups, whose composition and purpose are constantly changing. F&P data is collected 3 times a year (in the fall, winter and spring) along with numerous informal assessments, such as, running records, conferences, writing rubrics, etc. All students are given at least two writing performance tasks each year. Baseline, formative and a final assessment is given and scored. All data collected in F&P, and performance tasks are housed in our school google.docs database for our ENL teacher, service providers and future classroom teachers. The data reveals where the ELLs are and helps to drive future instruction. The data is also shared in order to help the classroom and ENL teacher to work in tandem in creating lessons that are appropriate for each student. Data shows that although in the fall many students perform below their native speaking peers, by the spring most students perform at or above grade level in their reading and writing. The ENL pull-out/co-teaching program and meetings and workshops with classroom teachers have been a key factor for this improvement. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have updated F&P kit. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program by how well students do during the course of the year in their regular classes and content area classes. We also examine how well they do on content unit exams and NYS Assessments (ELA, Math, and Science). We look at these data sources to determine how our program should be modified and shift our delivery of instructional and professional development. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers and participate in school intervention program (SIT). Intervention is put into place for students who did not progress. We have results of classroom test, running record, and periodic assessment as data sources. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The students who need extra support are given it through various interventions. A team of teachers, support staff, ENL teacher and administrators make up the SIT (Student Implementation Team)/ RtI (Response to Intervention)/ School Implementation Team. After students' teachers identify ELLs that may need extra support Tier I and Tier II interventions are implemented and discussed at the team meeting. All teachers are trained in specific instructional strategies that will help guide students. Teachers make any necessary accommodations as needed. The SIT meets weekly to discuss students who have been identified as needing extra support. A plan is made with classroom teachers, SIT and ENL teacher to accommodate for the ELL. Each student is monitored by the classroom teacher and the PPT. After specific time periods students are re-evaluated and discussions begin about moving on with the IEP process if needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the NYSESLAT scores this year we found that most students made progress, unless they were newly arrived after March. These students made little progress as they had just arrived in our school from other countries. The students who arrived prior to March either went up one or two levels or were deemed Commanding by June. We see that (65%) of students who have completed a full year of ENL services received Commanding at the end of the school year. Other newcomers (100%) who have received less than one year still improved their scores and levels. Only 1 student who completed a full year of services did not move levels but still improved her score within the Entering level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We inform parents and teachers with letters. During half-day, meetings are held with classroom teachers and we share student's academic scores. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 54  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. After reviewing data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores/levels a schedule that accommodates the students according to their level with students results from previous year NYSESLAT scores and current NYSITELL scores. The service hours try to follow the state mandated hours of service. These hours are created by the ENL teacher and administration. Students are grouped heterogeneously by level and no more than two grade spans will be in one class together. A co-teaching and stand-alone program model is used. Students are taught by the ENL teacher in Freestanding ENL program in a stand alone setting. Currently, a more effective co-teaching program is being created. Until it in full operation co-teaching happens weekly varying by grade and need. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We plan to follow the model that state has created and make adjustments as needed to meet the needs of our students. We are following all instructional blocks of time in accordance with the state mandated hours. ELLs will receive 360 minutes/ 180 minutes of instruction according to their level. Levels are decided using the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. After an ELL is no longer in the program, he/she receives an additional 90 minutes of instructional time for two additional years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will continue to deliver core content in each class including scaffolding to help ELLs. Teachers will adjust the language used when teaching each subject area so that ELLs can comprehend the instruction. The ENL teacher works with teachers in tandem to deliver instruction. Materials to be used in all programs include: guided reading books, literacy centers (purchased or teacher created), phonics and word study materials, white boards, computers with specialized ENL programs installed in the computers, such as Brainpop ESL, dictionaries and glossaries in student languages, Google translation programs on teachers' mobile devices, and other ELL specific materials, including an ENL specific checklists and ENL specific strategy lists to help guide teachers in instruction. Students will be grouped in regular classes by grade and in the standalone instruction classes by grade and mixed levels. No more than two grades are combined into one class. Content is delivered using sheltered instruction. All subjects and courses are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We are able to evaluate students in their native languages when translations of tests are provided. Yet, since our ELL population speaks a variety of languages where translations are not available, we are in the process of trying to meet the needs of the variety languages our ELLs speak. On-going school and teacher assessments, periodic assessments and state mandated examinations are among the tools used to help determine ELL level of language proficiency. The NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, state exams, Acuity assessments, quarterly Fountas and Pinnell Assessment data drives the adoption of instructional methodologies that best serve the ENL population. The practices and methodology we implement in supporting our ELLs are: Teachers will work with students on an individual basis: first to figure out what the needs of the student are. Students will be assessed every spring using the NYSITELL. They will be placed accordingly in the appropriate level ELL class when exam results become available in the fall/ late summer. Then working with classroom teachers an individualized plan would be 2018-19 CEP 55  made in order to help the student succeed in meeting the grade level standards. Currently, we have a 2nd grader who speaks Japanese and never attended school before. This is highly unusual as we never had a SIFE student in our school. Both short-term and long-term ELLs are in regular classrooms throughout the day except for when they receive their pull-out ENL instruction. For students who have been in a US school for less than 3 years we offer them the mandated ELL classes. First students are given the NYSITELL and if they do not score Commanding, they are immediately placed in level appropriate ELL classes. Students are instructed in all content areas in accordance with the minimum time allowances depending on their levels taken from the results of the NYSITELL. Students are offered the following instruction in their regular classes: For writing, students are given individual focused instruction and put into small groups for guided writing. They practice listening comprehension using multimedia tools. They practice written reproduction and written response, analyze text by word level, they use word boxes and word families to improve vocabulary, they practice questions both written and orally, and explore different types of genres both fiction and non-fiction, including poetry. In reading, ELLs are also offered individual focused instruction and put into small-guided reading groups. Students also practice speaking and listening in both ENL and regular classes using books on CD, listening comprehension exercises, music, and accountable talk. Students then take the NYSESLAT, and depending on their scores are kept in the ELL program or are offered an additional year of support by the classroom teacher. This support depends on the need of each individual student. Long-term ELLs, students being served for 4-6 years, have difficulties with reading and writing therefore they are given instruction the following ways. For writing, students are given individual focused instruction and put into small groups for guided writing. They practice listening comprehension using multimedia tools. They practice written reproduction and written response, analyze text by word level, they use word boxes and word families to improve vocabulary, they practice questions both written and orally, and explore different types of genres both fiction and non-fiction, including poetry. In reading, ELLs are also offered individual focused instruction and put into small-guided reading groups. They are given multiple-choice questions on tests. As mentioned above students will be accommodated by using the various teaching techniques to support their needs even when a level of proficiency has been met. Students may also receive additional support from the ENL teacher. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently have one SIFE and we assessed him to determine his reading, writing and math ability and levels. We would place him in the appropriate ENL grouping and we would offer him extra instruction. We work closely with classroom and SETTS teachers to provide remedial work. He would have materials that are age appropriate but at accessible levels for him. b. Newcomers are intergrated into the regular ENL program and instructed just like other ELLs. Specific strategies of differentiation are used to help them with phonics and learning to read and write in English. We have a high focus on reading and writing, for students who have been in the country for less than 3 years and must take the ELA exam. Collaboration between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher is vital in order to help students to prepare for the ELA exam. At first we give the CTB McGraw Hill predictives to all ELLs in ELA and we give the math one time during student's first year. This helps to assess their needs and provides additional learning opportunities around specific skills and content areas. We also use the NYSESLAT data to focus instruction in reading, writing, listening and speaking. c. For ELLs in the program for 4 to 6 years, we use the extended services data, and focus in on areas to be improved according to the NYSESLAT scores as well as teacher input. Any classroom interventions are evaluated and modified as necessary. We also practice for the NYSESLAT to help students to become familiar with any changes to the exam. Students are also offered supplemental instruction as needed to help them develop their skills to meet the challenges of grade level academic work. d. Currently, we have one long term ELL. We use Response to Intervention to help long term ELLs. We also offer extra services and will set up a special after school tutoring program. We also work closely with classroom teachers to help students improve their English abilities. 2018-19 CEP 56  e. Students who after testing receive Commanding on the NYSESLAT still receive all state mandated modifications for state and and city tests. The ENL teacher also uses the mandated 90 additional minutes to help with classroom work and any additional help they might need in a co-teaching model. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order for our students to succeed our ENL teacher constantly reinforces vocabulary by using word walls, students created vocabulary dictionaries. Constant repetition and review of new words and phrases is done to reinforce newly gained knowledge. Students have access to technology in each classroom. All materials are chosen carefully and are age-grade and level appropriate. All materials are Common Core aligned. The ENL teacher also meets with other service providers and reviews the IEP in order to follow mandated accommodations and services. The ENL teachers also meets with classroom teachers to consult, advise, and make any necessary accommodations to meet the needs of all ELL-SWD's. The ENL teacher also meets with parents and participants at IEP meetings and is a member, when needed, on the SIT. The ENL teachers works with all providers to ensure that SWD will be able to meet all of their mandates. Native language instruction can be offered, but is limited to the language the staff speaks and resources available. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have different levels of intervention, 3 tiered interventions are offered including at risk services provided by the classroom teachers, speech teacher, SETTS teachers, OT, PT, school psychologist and guidance counselor. All teachers also follow protocol with Response to Intervention (RTI) using various strategies in the classroom in order to help students who are experiencing academic difficulties. All services are offered in English. Any students who may need extra services listed above are dealt with following state protocol. The current ENL program helps students to learn English through content based instruction. The students are exposed to texts that are used in the home room or content classes depending on the grade level and subject. Students are encouraged to experiment with the English language and encouraged to try, even if they make a mistake. Students are also supported back in the classroom when not in the ENL class by their homeroom/content teachers and the ENL teacher. Language development focuses on a variety of methods including: TPR, grammar learning activities, open discussion, pair-work, projects, and group activities all which encourage all four modalities; reading, writing, speaking and listening. The program in flexible to meet the needs of the students to work within the schedules of the teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students who needs extra services will receive interventions both inside and outside of the classroom. Such interventions may include, but not limited to: Response to Intervention strategies, additional reading practice in small groups, work with SETTS teachers and other service providers, meetings with classroom teachers and the ENL teacher to individualize instruction. Subgroups will be created if needed to help students that need extra support based on data that is gathered by both classroom and the ENL teacher. In ELA, students have their own word walls and dictionaries in their native languages and English for both reading and writing. Students also work with partners to master high frequency words. Students participate in trips that are aligned with the Common Core and are based on current work including, plays and other literary works. In Math there are many math manipulative used to support students in their learning. Number lines, math charts, and other visual tool are used to enhance learning for ELLs. In Science, students are supported with textbooks that have diagrams and pictures that help with comprehension and students do a lot of hand-on work that allows them to explore science principles and interact with native speaking classmates.Teachers and students have access to BrainPop and other computer programs online. 2018-19 CEP 57  In Social Studies, students use primary resource documents/materials and all students participate in field trips and enrichment programs that are cross-curricular which are often grounded in Social Studies. All curriculum are offered in English with some native language support using glossaries and dictionaries. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After reviewing data from the NYSESLAT and ELA exams we have noticed that reading comprehension is necessary in order for students to understand text they read. This year, the ENL teacher will be working on developing reading skills and comprehension with students in small groups to help them understand content. We also believe that this will help to improve their academic vocabulary including Tier I and II vocabulary needed to understand Common Core themes and lessons. Guided reading will also be included in all classes to help ELLs learn fluency and comprehension. We also have incorporated more non-fiction text into the curriculum to meet not only ELL needs but also to meet Common Core Standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time we do not plan to discontinue any programs nor services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Through teacher Professional Development at both school and city levels teachers have specific training so that all ELLs are able to have access to all school programs. After school programs focusing on reading, writing, speaking, and listening are offered weekly to help strengthen the ELLs language development and use. We also offer a wrestling sports program which is open to all students. ELLs are invited to all after school program by classroom teachers/coaches and permission slips are sent home to join such activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials are available at appropriate age and grade levels, offering ELL's stimulating, challenging and peer learning opportunities. Our ESL classroom and library have books, dictionaries, books on CDs and software in English, Spanish and several native languages. Efforts are made to acquire new materials in more languages as need. The ESL teacher works closely with all core content teachers to develop and utilize technology in the classroom. STEM is also incoporated through various programs in conjunction with Cornell University and the Salvatori center. Materials include: books, picture cards books, math manipulatives, computers, realia, various language learning activity manipulatives, sight word cards, sight word BINGO, books in other languages, word cards in other languages, bilingual dictionaries, ESL specific language books and math, social studies books made for ELLs that specific vocabulary and concepts. These materials are used by all groups including subgroups. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only offer an ENL program. We support home language by using various websites in the native languages of our students. We also have content books in Spanish and other learning materials in Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, French, Russian, and Spanish including picture dictionaries. Students also are encouraged to write in their native language especially in their first few moths in the country. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS/IS 217 ensures that all ELLs receive the required services/resources by providing all classroom teachers with resources and information to help them support their ELLs. The ENL teacher provides books, materials, scaffolded work and other resources by grade and ability level. Teachers also have access to all books and materials to support ELLs that are in the ENL teacher’s classroom and in the school library. These resources correspond to the student's grade and are carefully chosen to meet their cognitive needs keeping in mind what is written on their IEP. 2018-19 CEP 58  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials are available at appropriate age and grade levels, offering ELL's stimulating, challenging and peer learning opportunities. Our ESL classroom and library have books, books on CDs and software in English, Spanish and several native languages. Efforts are made to acquire new materials in more languages as need. The ESL teacher works closely with all core content teachers to develop and utilize technology in the classroom. STEM is also incoporated through various programs in conjunction with Cornell University and the Salvatori center. Materials include: books, picture cards books, math manipulatives, computers, realia, various language learning activity manipulatives, sight word cards, sight word BINGO, books in other languages, word cards in other languages, bilingual dictionaries, ESL specific language books and math, social studies books made for ELLs that specific vocabulary and concepts. These materials are used by all groups including subgroups. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are newly enrolled are after testing are placed into regular classes and the ENL teacher does extra push-in support for the first month to help acclimate new ELLs. The ENL teacher also has a meeting with parents are instructs parents what they can do at home to help support their ELLs. Teachers all take part in specialized ENL training within the first month of school and extra support is given as needed to classroom teachers to support their ELLs. All parents are also invited to curriculum night in September to meet teachers and staff. Before schools starts in late August, the PTA holds a meet and greet BBQ and picnic. All parents including ELL parents are invited to attend. ENL Teacher-Rosemary Fung Parent Coordinator-Lauraine Rademaker School Counselor-Jeff Gurwin 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is held for ELL and classroom teachers, common branch teachers, subject area teachers, secretaries, parent coordinators and guidance counselors throughout the school year. To further English language acquisition for the ELL children, our teachers have/or will continue to participate in in-house professional development focused on the stages of language acquisition, ELL differentiation, and implementation of instructional ENL strategies during the literacy block, making content comprehensible for our ELLs and using assessment data to inform instruction. Teachers who have ELLs meet in the fall to review NYSESLAT data analysis instructional implications with the teaching of reading and writing for ELLs. Teaching strategies for the NYS ELA exams which are aligned to the new National Core ELA standards, have an emphasis on ELL 2018-19 CEP 59  strategies. Staff also particpates in professional development which focuses how to teach content to ELLs and various strategies needed to support ELLs in the classroom. The ENL teacher attends various workshops provided by the city throughout the year to help her incorporate Common Core into his lessons. Teachers are provided with professional development at the school and city-wide level to help them understand and prepare to teach ELLs of various backgrounds and abilities. Frequent lunch and learn workshops are also well-attended by staff who work with ELLs. Subjects include: Supporting of mixed abilities, helping ELLs with special needs, interventions for ELLs, and how to incorporate Common Core into lessons, using the translation and interpretation line/unit, helping parents understand the Common Core, and technolgy to help ELLs in the classroom. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ELL pullout/push-in program allows students who have transitioned from lower to middle school to receive additional targeted instruction over and above the mandated instructional hours. All staff are given access to a variety of supports that they can offer their students to prepare them for middle school and high school. The guidance counselor receives professional development concerning how to help transition students from elementary to middle school and also middle school to high school, this training also includes ELL specific training. He answers questions about these transitions for both parents and students as needed. He also is available for private meetings at the request of the student or parents. The guidance counselor also meets with students in families to prepare them for the high selection process and how to select schools that have strong supports for ELLs and former ELLs. If requested the guidance counselor also provides translated documents to parents to help them understand the process. All staff receives the minimum of 15% of their training in ENL related topics. Such training includes: Lunch and Learn for teachers throughout the year about ENL specific topics, specialized workshops, training sessions are held at the school, outside of school workshops and in individual and group meetings throughout the school year in the form of professional development. Records of school wide meetings and ENL professional development are kept in the ENL teacher's binder and all staff maintain a professional development record on Googledocs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher is in constant contact with parents through both informal and informal interactions. She also meets with parents to discuss progress of students, test score results and other topics that need to be addressed. There is also a minimum of two parent workshops provided by the ENL teacher. Past topics have included: Helping your students with English at home, using resources including technology, helping understand NY State testing, helping students succeed in American school, etc. We will continue to offer workshops based on parents' needs and concerns. Any parent who needs interpretation is provided with services from teachers/staff/or the translation and interpretation unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a strong, involved PTA, consisting of ELL and non ELL parents/guardians. All parents/guardians including the parents/guardians of ELL's are invited to attend parent curriculum workshops, PTA meetings, SLT meetings and other meetings 2018-19 CEP 60  with staff and administration including our Annual International Dinner and other scheduled social and cultural events. Parents are encouraged to participate in information meetings here at the school and join in High School tours and the district Middle School Fair so they are more fully aware of educational options for their children. The PTA reaches out to get parents involved in planning, as well as, participating in these events. Parents and other trained members of the Roosevelt Island community are trained to volunteer as learning leaders in classrooms throughout the building. Parents are kept informed by letters and updated calendars sent home by backpack and through our PTA Hawk Happening online newsletter. In addition we reach out to parents through notices in our local community "Main Street Wire" weekly publication. Translations services are used when necessary in communicating with parents. These services have been used for the following: interpretation of parent-teacher conferences, registration process, lunch forms, administration contact with parents, workshop interpreters and other school based activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mandana Beckman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Roosevelt Island School School DBN: 02M217 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mandana Beckman Title Principal Jennifer Allen Assistant Principal Lauraine Rademaker Parent Coordinator Rosemary Fung ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erin Olavesen Parent Ursula Fokine N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jeffrey Gurwin School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Yuet Chu Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M School Name: 217 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As new students enroll into the New York City Public system parents are asked to read and sign the parent/guardian preferred language letter. This information is entered into ATS and is monitored via the RAPL and RHLA reports to be sure the data is correct. We also provide parents with a Copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities, which covers their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in selected languages as needed.If a particular language is not requested they receive this information in English. 2018-19 CEP 64  We have staff members who are able to provide Chinese, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Japanese, Russian, Romanian, Spanish and Turkish interpretation and translation to parents/guardians and family members. When necessary we also utilize the DOE’s translation and interpretation Unit. Then the ESL teacher enters the data about home language into a google document that is shared with the staff and updated whenever a new student enters our school. Classroom teachers also collect data about home languages from their own individual surveys when a new students enter his/her class. The information collected by teachers is cross-referenced with the preferred language on the home language and preferred language surveys and blue card information. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The following languages are preferred for oral and written communication: English, Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Vietnamese and Russian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Welcome letters in the fall and when new students enroll in our school, Report cards in the fall/winter and spring/summer 2018-19 CEP 65  Parent handbooks in the fall School calendars in the fall and spring Other critical information about educational programs and services throughout the year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school has the following events when parent and school staff meet face-to face: curriculum night in the fall, parent-teacher conferences in the fall and spring. PTA events and meetings throughout the year, parent engagement events (varies by grade, througout the year), and IEP meetings (ongoing) throughout the year, open school week in the fall, and open house in the spring, high school and middle school application meetings in the fall with the guidance counselor. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 66  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In addition, to services mentioned above, money is set aside in the school budget to purchase interpretation and translation services. DOE documents in English and various languages are available in the main office and/or at the main entrance at all times. Documents can also be found at the Translation and Interpretation intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school is considering scheduling a focus group this winter which will represent parents of all cultures and languages at PS/IS 217 to gather feedback and best practices to meet their translation and interpretation needs presently and in the future. 2018-19 CEP 67 
