2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M224 School Name: M.S. 224 MANHATTAN EAST SCHOOL FOR ARTS & ACADEMICS Principal: LUIS GENAO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics 310400010224 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 04M224 410 East 100 th Street, N.Y. N.Y. 10029 212-860-6047 212-410-0678 Phone Number: Fax: Melissa Cancel MCancel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Luis M. Genao Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mr. Francis Handibode Ms. Sylvie Nare (I.A. President) Mr. Francis Handibobe N/A Mr. Tamar Joseph District Information Geographical District: 4 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 th Street, N.Y., N.Y. 10035 AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, N.Y., N.Y. 1001 Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-3893 Phone Number: 212-356-7546 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luis M. Genao Francis Handibode JamilleMarrero Audrey Bethea Tamar Joseph Kathy Lekadou Melissa Cancel *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Thomas Cusack Milo Novelo Sylvie Kande Jenny Zheng Jeremy Greenfield Member/ SLTSecretary Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics provides students with a rigorous 21st century liberal arts education in a safe and caring learning environment. Through this approach we foster high academic expectations, knowledge of the arts, and respect for diversity and for self. Manhattan East is an inclusive, holistically, screened school wherein the power and beauty of the whole community supports each student to the highest level of critical and creative thought. At Manhattan East all students engage in a continuum of rigorous arts and academic courses, culminating in up to 2018-19 CEP 9  three Regents Level High School classes in the eighth grade and the opportunity to specialize in an art form of choice. Teaching and learning at Manhattan East is a combination of progressive and traditional practices, with high levels of teacher facilitated student discourse focused on developing the love of learning. High School Preparedness, College and Career Readiness and . 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Manhattan East Center For Arts & Academics was founded in 1981 on the principle that students, parents, teachers and administrators are all partners in establishing the finest educational program possible. In the Fall of 2000, Manhattan East was named as an independent, open-zone school by the NYC Board of Education. The school was renamed: Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics, MS224 . A pioneer of the Shared Decision Making ideal, Manhattan East embraces this principle by encouraging the active participation of the School Leadership Team (SLT) and the Parent Advisory Council (PAC) in the continued development of our being. Traditionally, the Manhattan East experience is bolstered every year by the Parents Advisory Council and the School Leadership Team's support of key academic and artistic activities (from reviewing and refining school academic and social-emotional programming to collaborative planning our celebrations and annual events--- Nature's Classroom Science Camp, International Feast and Talent Show, Annual Block Party, etc.). Manhattan East is one of the original small schools, and though while screened, we maintain an incredibly diverse, harmonious environment. Indeed, the beauty of a desegregated school was always part of the vision. We hold the following core values as the bedrock of our school mission, our school culture, classroom practice, and interpersonal engagement: 1. Respect for Arts and Academics: Cultivating critical and creative thought and a vibrant learning community so that all our students have access to higher education, can pursue rich and satisfying lives, and are prepared to deal with complexity, diversity and change. 2. Respect for All: Acknowledging and drawing upon our diverse humanity; respecting, engaging and supporting each other in our differences and creating an inclusive environment where everybody can contribute to the culture of the school (and the betterment of the world). 3. Commitment to Community: Acknowledging and drawing upon the rich community resources that surround and support the school to enhance student academics, artistic development and social-emotional learning. Manhattan East is bolstered by the Parents Advisory Council and the School Leadership Team which sponsor and support our academic and artistic activities (Nature’s Classroom, Scholastic Book Drive, Talent Show, etc.),. 4. Respect for Self: Caring for youth, challenging youth, educating youth, creating a learning space for youth, where students can try out and build upon evolving notions of self, youth agency and trans-cultural engagement. Together these four, interconnected dimensions of Manhattan East’s Mission serve to energize, guide and sustain Manhattan East as a true place of learning--a school that does justice to the beauty strength, intelligence and spirit of our youth. Manhattan East has developed partnerships with numerous arts organizations and community groups. Organizations with which we collaborate to develop our outstanding educational program include the following:  Asphalt Green 2018-19 CEP 10   Ensemble Connect: A program of Carnegie Hall, The Julliard School and the Weill Music Institute  Elevate Education  Global Kids, Inc  MasteryConnect  Morningside Center: Restorative Circles Advisory  Mount Sinai Hospital  Beacon (Afterschool) Program with The Stanley M. Isaacs Neighborhood Center  Teaching Matters, Inc.  Urban Advantage Manhattan East boasts an inclusive culture, positive learning environment focused on student success. We have a rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standard. Our assessment practices inform our curriculum and instruction. Our resources are aligned to support our school mission and vision We boldly offer our student high academic challenges and bolster our students with high levels of support. Our Teacher Teams engage in collaborative practices, using an inquiry approach, to implement data-based interventions and thus accelerate student learning and family collaborations. For the 2017-18 school year, we continue on this path; synchronizing our school goals with the Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools and with the Vision, Mission and Goals of Community School District 4 . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Manhattan East Student Body is a diverse one; ethnically, racially, and socio-economically. Approximately 165 students in grades 6, 7, and 8 travel to Manhattan East by car, bus and subway from Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island. Approximately 5% of our students are English language learners (ELLs)--mostly long term ELLs-- and 27% are students with Individual Education Plans. Regardless, our students have much in common. They share a genuine commitment to the Manhattan East community and to their work as students. Deeply respectful of one another's talents, our student's shine in many ways as they engage with the rigorous Regents level curriculum and gain new skills in the visual and performing arts. Student success and access to the challenges offered by our accelerated curriculum are facilitated through high levels of customized support, including a discourse-rich environment, which we continue to refine, and weekly small group instruction for students in ELA and Math. In this regard for the 2017-2018 Academic Year our faculty will be studying with Coaches from WestEd’s Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL). QTEL is a unique professional development initiative that provides educators with the tools they need to help all students achieve college and career-readiness in the 21st century. QTEL’s pedagogy is characterized by the following principles: high expectations, sustained academic rigor, quality teacher and student interactions, a focus on language and quality curricula. Finally, it is our expectation that this effort will continue in our after-school wherein our partners will offer extended learning and small group tutoring/homework help, as well as extracurricular activities to all students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. For the last two years at Manhattan East we have dedicated ourselves to increasing our levels of support for all students. As per the Framework for Great Schools, we continue to refine our Supportive Environment..., a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. At Manhattan East High Expectations are combined with High Supports to maximize student success. With this approach we have made significant progress on NY State test results in Student Achievement in English Language Arts (9% increase) and Math (4% increase) in 2015-16, outpacing New York City average. Data for 2016-17 demonstrated an additional 4% increase in Math and a disconcerting 4% decrease in ELA. Our Learning Focus Area for 2018-19 is to continue to use the inquiry process to develop and monitor approaches focused on improving student outcomes: Teachers will provide multiple opportunities for the students to engage in meaningful and rigorous group discussions 2018-19 CEP 11  (cooperative learning opportunities) using research-based (QTEL) strategies to engage students in the content. Thus addressing gaps between where students are and the expectations of the New York State Next Generation Learning Standards through curriculum alignment and/or targeted academic interventions with a particular focus on our ELA and Math Programming. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M224 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 172 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 70.9% % Reduced Lunch 7.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 53.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.14 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 55.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 6 7 93.5% 2.3% 27.9% 26.7% 9.9% 1.7% 2 50% 7.7 35.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Manhattan East School For Arts & Academics has an illustrious history of engaging students in ambitious academic and artistic activity and thus further developing the critical thinking skills of our students. All of our students have the opportunity to graduate having completed three High School Regents Classes (Algebra, Earth Science and US History) as well as High School Spanish. This achievement is facilitated by congruous sixth-eighth grade instruction that includes high level questioning, rigorous performance tasks that challenge and push student thinking, and differentiated instruction to support the diversity of learners in order that all students have access to the curriculum. With this approach we have made significant progress in Student Achievement in Math and English Language Arts in 2015-16, outpacing the District 4 and New York City averages in both subjects (2015-16 NYC School Quality Guide). Data for 2016-17 demonstrated an additional 4% increase in Math and 4% decrease in ELA. It should also be noted that from 2015-2018 there has been a significant increase of students with Individual Education Plans, from 8% to approximately 28% of the total student population. This sub-population of our student body has made significant gains in Math but are still lagging in English Language Arts. A deeper analysis of this sub-population reveals that 26% of our students with IEP are long-term ELLs and conversely that 90% of our English Language Learners are long-term ELLs and students with IEPS. Thus a significant focus of our work must be on providing greater combined support for ELLs who have IEPs (approximately 10% of our student population). For the 2018-19 School year, Manhattan East will train all teachers in pedagogical practices that support ELLs and Students with IEPs (QTEL) and institutionalize weekly periods for student intervention and acceleration for ELA, Math and Regents Instruction. These weekly interventions will be based on an on-going review and analysis of student learning/performance data. Teachers will:  o Identify students who are outside the sphere of success (students who are not making progress) Study small group of students and try to understand what might be holding them back   Review research on Mind Science and Equity to implement strategies that address mindset  and implicit bias review and document efficacy of interventions quarterly, modifying groupings and differentiated learning opportunities as needed, allowing students to demonstrate movement towards or beyond the Next Generation Learning Standards. By this approach, we project providing greater targeted support to our students who are struggling. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate improved quality of writing across the content areas via argumentative (e.g. compare and contrast) essays and developing their understanding of literature including their ability to find a central theme. Our goals is a combined 20% increase on the New York State ELA exam. Documentation towards this achievement will be done quarterly via writing portfolios utilizing CCLS-aligned rubrics and MasteryConnect data capture; particular attention will be given to students who struggled to progress based on quarterly triangulation of data from Performance Series, Jupiter, and MasteryConnect. Increased quality of writing will be documented in MasteryConnect through a focus on the following Next Generation Learning Standards for Writing: NGLS 6W1 and 6W2; 7W1 and 7W2; 8W1 and 8W2. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teaching Matters Coach & Administration Team Professional Development support from Teaching Matters: Assessment Matters All Teachers & Administrators Sept-June  Monthly meetings with teachers to review data and create Tier 1 and Tier 3 action plans.  Monthly communication with family of targeted population from Success Mentors.   Monitoring of practice and of student in-class (Tier 1) and small group (Tier 2) performance.  Utilization of data for management of Individual Education Plans.  Quarterly review of data for monitoring and identification of additional areas of needs for students; including students with disabilities, English Language Learners and Students in Transitional Housing. Support in developing literacy strategies across all disciplines Support in delivery of instruction    Case Studies Family_School_Student Action plans established as needed. All Teachers & Administrators Aug-June  Collaboratively design, adopt, or adapt CCLS rubrics for short response, extended response, and essays and document responses in Jupiter/MasteryConnect for review.  Collaboratively assess prompts and student writing  Integrate District Writing assessment into school writing practice ELA Team, Teaching Matters & Administration Team Creation of Parent Workshops and materials on Manhattan East Inquiry Project, Writing initiative, Writing Rubrics, as well as exemplars for their reference. Individual family conferences provided by Mentors of students involved. PAC, Parents, Teachers & Administrators. Sept-June ELA Team Teaching Matters, Parent Coordinator, PAC & SLT 2018-19 CEP 16  Schedule Teacher/Student/Parent Workshops in collaboration with Elevate Education. Elevate Education introduces students to the fundamental skills that they need to build across middle and high school in order to develop a strong study skills platform. Skills covered: PAC, Parents, Teachers, Sept-April Elevate Education, Parent Coordinator, PAC & SLT Students, & Administrators  Dynamic reading- How to read a text and pull out the key points rather than simply summarizing every sentence.  Note taking- How to get those key points into a set of organized notes that will facilitate effective learning.  Conceptual learning skills- How to understand how the  information fits together. Independent learning skills- What independent learning means and how to get it done. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Commencing in September 2017 Manhattan East will provide quarterly support to parents on: 1) Review of grading Academic Policy and training on JupiterGrades 2) Curriculum Night presentation on Manhattan East Writing initiative, including documentation in Jupiter/MateryConnect, as well as sharing exemplars for their reference. 3) September and January teacher/Student/family Workshops in collaboration with Elevate Education. Elevate Education introduces students and families to the fundamental skills that they need to build across middle and high school in order to develop a strong study skills platform.  Dynamic reading- How to read a text and pull out the key points rather than simply summarizing every sentence.  Note taking- How to get those key points into a set of organized notes that will facilitate effective learning.  Conceptual learning skills- How to understand how the information fits together.  Independent learning skills- What independent learning means and how to get it done. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Development time will be allotted for design and implementation of ELA rubrics as well as norming of exemplars for use by Teachers and Parents.  Teaching Matters Coach will work with Parents, Content Team and targeted teachers;  Principal and Assistant Principal will support MasteryConnect and Performance Series as a tool for higher instruction across 12:1:1 Classrooms;  Assistant Principal will support alignment of MasteryConnect with SESIS/IEP progress monitoring  Elevate Education will provide teacher, student and parent workshops on Student Habits and Study skills.  Administration Team will conduct observation of practice and interventions in action, providing feedback and coaching on next steps.  The PAC & SLT will identify and calendar further trainings for parents to work with students effectively.  Teacher Per Session and Teacher Per Diem will be provided for additional training on MasteryConnect; Data Driven Instruction and for student intervention and acceleration.  Teaching Matters will provide: o Literacy coaching for teachers on planning and implementation of units and lessons o Support in developing literacy strategies across all disciplines o Support in delivery of instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Documentation towards this achievement will be done quarterly via writing portfolios utilizing CCLS-aligned rubrics and MasteryConnect data capture. All ELA and Humanities Teachers will begin planning in September to integrate Writing Tasks within Unit Plans in their curriculum and to document progress via MasteryConnect and/or Jupiter. They will monitor student progress and share best practices during professional development sessions . The program will be evaluated quarterly as part of inquiry process. Parent Engagement activities will include post-activity survey. By February 2018 review of Performance Series, JupiterGrades, MasteryConnect should demonstrate 90% improvement in ELA. Teacher reflection on DDIT or other Inquiry reflection tool should also articulate veracity of practice. Parent usage of Jupiter and participation in official and un-official family conference will be monitored and documented by Parent Coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) It is expected that at least one inquiry cycle will have been documented per teacher in the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT) and or other system (such as Advance) by January 2018 and two will have been completed by April 2018. CCLS aligned Writing Rubric for Progress Monitoring in MasteryConnect, JupiterGrades, and administrative observations and teacher reflections should also articulate veracity of practice and support for student involved in our 2018-19 CEP 18  Inquiry groups. Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS ELA exam will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). JupiterGrades and PC database for monitoring of parent engagement at official and un-official conferences with Inquiry Group families will also be monitored. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Manhattan East School For Arts & Academics has an illustrious history of engaging students in ambitious academic and artistic activity and thus further developing the critical thinking skills of our students. All of our students have the opportunity to graduate having completed three High School Regents Classes (Algebra, Earth Science and US History) as well as High School Spanish. This achievement is facilitated by congruous sixth-eighth grade instruction that includes high level questioning, rigorous performance tasks that challenge and push student thinking, and differentiated instruction to support the diversity of learners in order that all students have access to the curriculum. In 2015-16 Manhattan East established a strategic reading program for our low level readers, content-based interventions for students who were struggling in ELA, Math or Regents Courses, as well as after-school academies for accelerated students. This resulted in significant progress in Student Achievement in Math (4% increase) and English Language Arts (10% increase) in 2015-16. Data for 2016-17 demonstrated an additional 4% increase in Math and a disconcerting 4% decrease in ELA. Greater triangulation of the data also highlights that our students with Individual Education Plans (which increased from 8% to approximately 28% of the total student population from 2015-2018) have made significant gains in Math but are still lagging in English Language Arts, especially in our self-contained environments. Furthermore, 90% of our English Language Learners are long-term ELLs and students with IEPS. For the 2017-18 School year, Manhattan East will continue to support the acceleration of students in the school's lowest third in performance, with a particular emphasis on those who have individual educational plans, as this sub-group had the least amount of achievement in ELA and Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, all teachers and teacher teams will have engaged in data driven instruction with a focus on students with Individual Education Plans and/or students scoring at the L1 level. Teachers/Teaching teams will document impact of at least three inquiry-based interventions with the goal of achieving 20% growth in New York State ELA and Math Exams for targeted student sub-groups (specifically, students underperforming in ELA and Math as documented by JupiterGrades, Performance Series assessments and L1 scores in NY State Exams). Historically this sub-group is 2018-19 CEP 20  predominantly comprised of English Language Learners and students with IEPS. It should be noted that the majority of our ELLs have IEPs. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will review or be trained on the utilization of All Teachers July-Oct Performance Series, Jupiter, Mastery Connect, and the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT). to document and evaluate student progress. Review of New York State Tests results for prior and incoming students. All Teachers Aug-Oct Conduct Running Record and ELA Performance Series Baseline on all students w/ IEP and those entering having scored in L1 or school's lowest third. Sept- Oct Students reading Jan-Feb May-June two years below grade level. Conduct Math Diagnostic and Math Performance Series Baseline on all entering students. New Students Sept- Oct On-going Strategic Reading support provided by Special Education teachers and Speech Teacher. Jan-Feb May-June Sept-June Students reading two years below grade level. Peer Collaborative Teacher , TM Coach & Administration Peer Collaborative Teacher , TM Coach & Administration ELA Teachers, Special Education Teachers and Speech Teacher & Administration Math Teachers & Special Education Teachers, TM Coach and Administration ESL/ELA Teachers, Special Education Teachers and Speech Teacher 2018-19 CEP 22  Teacher Teams will collaboratively review and support planning and implementation of curricular modifications and student interventions. Student support will occur during classtime (differentiation) as well as targeted support for content-based interventions during elective time and afterschool. Targeted Students Sept-June Peer Collaborative Teacher, TM Coach & Administration Professional Development support for 12:1:1 Teachers from Teaching Matters (TM) Coach. TM will provide: Targeted Teachers Sept- Jun Peer Collaborative Teacher , TM Coach & Administration  Unlimited access to Teaching Matters resource library  Literacy coaching for teachers on planning and implementation of units and lessons Support in developing literacy strategies across all disciplines Support in delivery of instruction    Collaboratively design, adopt, or adapt CCLS rubrics for short response, extended response, and essays and document responses in Jupiter/MateryConnect for review.  Collaboratively assess prompts and student writing All Teachers Sept- June Peer Collaborative Teacher, LDC & Administration  Engaging families and supporting their understanding of flexible schedule for academic interventions in order to support their children at home and/or during afterschool. Aug-Oct Parents, Teachers & Administrators Parent Coordinator, Global Kids Staff, SCAN-NY Staff, Elevate Education, Success Mentors/Teachers & Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged at three primary levels: 1) Workshops and orientations (e.g. Group and One-to-one trainings on JupiterGrade books, Elevate Education workshops on support student habits, time management, monitoring of student cell phone utilization, etc. 2) Targeted families (those in targeted sub-group) will be provided with Success Mentor, supporting their understanding of flexible schedule for academic interventions, as well as access from community partners for greater support for their children at home and/or during after-school, as needed. 3) Quarterly reports and daily access to student performance. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Development time will be allotted for data analysis and planning of interventions.  Professional Development time will be allotted for design and implementation of ELA rubrics as well as norming of exemplars for use by Teachers and Parents.  Teaching Matters Coach will work with Parents, Content Team and targeted teachers;  Principal and Assistant Principal will support MasteryConnect and Performance Series as a tool for higher instruction across 12:1:1 Classrooms;  Assistant Principal will support alignment of MasteryConnect with SESIS/IEP progress monitoring  Elevate Education will provide teacher, student and parent workshops on Student Habits and Study skills.  Administration Team will conduct observation of practice and interventions in action, providing feedback and coaching on next steps.  The PAC & SLT will identify and calendar further trainings for parents to work with students effectively as well as opportunities to celebrate success.  Teaching Matters will provide: o Unlimited access to Teaching Matters core tools, planning space and resource library o Literacy coaching for teachers on planning and implementation of units and lessons o Support in developing literacy strategies across all disciplines o Support in delivery of instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Documentation towards ELA achievement will be done quarterly via writing portfolios utilizing CCLS-aligned rubrics and MasteryConnect data capture. All ELA and Humanities Teachers will begin planning in September to integrate Writing Tasks within Unit Plans in their curriculum and to document progress via MasteryConnect and/or Jupiter. They will monitor student progress and share best practices during professional development sessions . The program will be evaluated quarterly as part of inquiry process. Parent Engagement activities will include direct support from Teachers for students in intervention groups (Teachers functioning as Success Mentors for students). Documentation towards Math achievement will be done quarterly via CCLS-aligned Math Assignments and Tasks uploaded into MasteryConnect. All Math Teachers will begin interventions and supports in September based on last year Math data. These intervention groups will shift based on incoming data from MasteryConnect, Jupiter, and Performance Series. Teachers will monitor student progress and share best practices during professional development sessions . Parent Engagement activities will include direct support from Teachers for students in intervention groups (Teachers functioning as Success Mentors for students). 2018-19 CEP 24  By February 2018 review of Performance Series, JupiterGrades, MasteryConnect should demonstrate 90% improvement in Math and ELA. Teacher reflection on DDIT or other Inquiry reflection tool should also articulate veracity of practice. Parent usage of Jupiter and participation in official and un-official family conference will be monitored and documented by Parent Coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. It is expected that at least one inquiry cycle will have been documented per teacher in the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT) and or other system (such as Advance) by January 2018 and two will have been completed by April 2018. CCLS aligned Writing Rubric for Progress Monitoring in MasteryConnect, JupiterGrades, and administrative observations and teacher reflections should also articulate veracity of practice and support for student involved in our Inquiry groups. Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS ELA exam will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). CCLS aligned Math assigments for Progress Monitoring in MasteryConnect, JupiterGrades, and administrative observations and teacher reflections should also articulate veracity of practice and support for student involved in our Inquiry groups. Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS Math exam will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). JupiterGrades and PC database for monitoring of parent engagement at official and un-official conferences with Inquiry Group families will also be monitored. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Manhattan East School For Arts & Academics has an illustrious history of engaging students in ambitious academic and artistic activity and thus further developing the critical thinking skills of our students. All of our students have the opportunity to graduate having completed three High School Regents Classes (Algebra, Earth Science and US History) as well as High School Spanish. This achievement is facilitated by congruous sixth-eighth grade instruction that includes high level questioning, rigorous performance tasks that challenge and push student thinking, and differentiated instruction to support the diversity of learners in order that all students have access to the curriculum. On our last Quality Review we received a ‘well developed’ rating for the work being done by our Eighth Grade Teacher Team as well as the work of our Model Teacher and Emerging Teacher. For the 2017-18 School year, Manhattan East will focus the ELA/Social Studies Content Teams on reviewing student writing 6-8 ( including Curriculum Maps, Unit Plans, Writings Tasks, and Student Work Products), with a focus on enhancing student oral and written analysis of non-fiction documents, as necessitated by the U.S. History Regents. Our Sixth-Eighth Grade Math and Science Teams will also focus on reviewing student-work samples, refining instruction and curriculum maps which support the academic rigor and higher order thinking required by the Algebra and Earth Science Regents exams . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of key personnel will be involved in Weekly Content Meetings focused on maintaining high expectations for all students, sustaining academic rigor across classrooms, integrating greater engagement via student led discussions and end of unit tasks (QTEL), and collaborative review of proposed curricular modifications and student interventions. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly Professional Collaborative Learning on the design and implementation of Unit Plans, end of unit tasks, curricular modifications and student interventions will be conducted and aligned with observations and learning walks to provide oversite and full support. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals Sept-June Monthly peer support and Inter-visitations on integrating literacy-based protocols (QTEL, Socratic Seminar, Turn and Talk, Literature Circles, etc.) into instruction for greater student engagement and understanding. Sept- May Targeted one-to-one mentoring of New Teachers and Special Education Teachers. All teachers will utilize Jupiter, Mastery Connect and Performance series to document and Parents Sept- June as per Inquiry Cycle Teaching Matters Coach & Administration Team Teaching Matters Coach & Administration Team Teaching Matters Coach & Administration Team evaluate student progress. Teacher Teams will collaboratively review and support the planning and implementation of curricular modifications and student interventions including the documentation of interventions in the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT). Schedule Teacher/Student/Parent Workshops in collaboration with Elevate Education. Elevate Education introduces students to the fundamental skills that they need to build across middle and high school in order to develop a strong study skills platform. Skills covered:  Dynamic reading- How to read a text and pull out the key points rather than simply summarizing every sentence. Parents and Students Three sessions per year: December,March, and May. Parent Coordinator, Elevate Education, PAC, Principal & Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 27  Note taking- How to get those key points into a set of organized notes that will facilitate effective learning.  Conceptual learning skills- How to understand  how the information fits together. Independent learning skills- What independent learning means and how to get it done. QTEL Training: WestEd’s Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL) is a unique professional development initiative that provides educators with the tools they need to help all students achieve college and career-readiness in the 21st century. QTEL’s pedagogy is characterized by the following principles: high expectations, sustained academic rigor, quality teacher and student interactions, a focus on language and quality curricula. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement .Teachers Four sessions: November January QTEL Team, Lead Teacher & Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will meet as Teams with Parents to discuss student progress and to determine programs and policies that will support student success. These meetings will occur year-long, September-June, as needed and based on quarterly data review. These meetings are designed to be more intensive than Student-led family conferences and can be initiated by family or school based on need. In third and fourth quarterly it is expected that all students who have been designated at risk of being "promotion-in-doubt" have had at least one Teacher Team conference. Parent Workshops in collaboration with Elevate Education will also be scheduled. Elevate Education introduces students to the fundamental skills that they need to build across middle and high school in order to develop a strong study skills platform. Skills covered:  Dynamic reading- How to read a text and pull out the key points rather than simply summarizing every sentence.  Note taking- How to get those key points into a set of organized notes that will facilitate effective learning.  Conceptual learning skills- How to understand how the information fits together.  Independent learning skills- What independent learning means and how to get it done. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  QTEL will be done collaboratively with other schools in District thus minimizing cost. 2018-19 CEP 28  Lead Teacher will work with Content Team and targeted teachers; Speech Teacher will support school-wide literacy intervention;    Elevate Education will provide teacher, student and parent workshops on Student Habits and Study skills.  Administration Team will conduct observation of practice and interventions in action, providing feedback and coaching on next steps.  The PAC & SLT will identify and calendar further trainings for parents to work with students effectively.  Teaching Matters will provide: o Unlimited access to TM tools, planning space and resource library o Literacy coaching for teachers on planning and implementation of units and lessons o Support in developing literacy strategies across all disciplines o Support in delivery of instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. It is expected that at least two data points or inquiry cycles will have been documented per teacher in MasteryConnect or the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT) by February as well as two observations per teacher in ADVANCE portal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. It is expected that at least one inquiry cycle will have been documented per teacher in the Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT) and or other system (such as Advance) by January 2018 focusing on QTEL pedagogy and/or Question and Discussion techniques, and two will have been completed by April 2018. Administrative observations and teacher reflections should document teachers development in using QTEL architecture and other questions and discussion practices (such as, Socratic Seminar). Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS ELA, Math and relevant Regents exams will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). NYCDOE Parent and student surveys will also be reviewed to monitor impact of practice on school rigor. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2015-16 school year, Manhattan East documented and reviewed student progress through utilization of Jupiter Gradebook, Performance Series, and a Mastery Connect Pilot in the eighth grade. The Principal and Assistant Principal also worked collaboratively with the new Peer Collaborative Teacher to provide targeted support for teachers and document improvement of practice on ADVANCE as well as working with the entire school community to develop a two-tiered protocol protocol for Student-led Conferences: one for Grade-level Team Conference with Family and the other for Individual Teacher Conferences with Families. Review of data also highlighted a need for greater supports and interventions for our eighth grade students who were taking three Regents: Algebra, US History and Earth Science. This additional support allowed for more students to take the Regents, culminating in an 83% pass rate for the US History Regents. For the 2016-17 School year, the Administration and Teacher Leaders of Manhattan East continued and expanded this effort by continuing to gather and analyze student and classroom data, including teacher observation, as well as parent and student surveys, to identify areas in need of development. This allowed us to address concerns in the Learning Survey around the social-emotional development of our students, by having a core group of teachers trained in "restorative practices" and having that key group launch the Restore 360 Advisory Program. We also expanded the academic support/interventions services being offered to students by including weekly periods for sixth-eighth grade pull-out support. Finally, in January, 2017, we enhance this advisory and academic support program by launching a "Success Mentor Program"; in which every student who was at risk of failing received a mentor that partnered with family and offered our version of wrap-around support. In order to support these efforts all teachers received training on the Restore 360 curriculum (directly and indirectly from Morningside Center) as well as training on Trauma-Informed practice from Sanctuary for Families. For 2017-18, as stated above, we note a significant increase of students with Individual Education Plans, from 8% to approximately 28% over three years. We also noted, via 2016-17 data from JupiterGrade, NYS Exams, and MasteryConnect, a need for greater support for our students who are scoring at our lowest third (regardless of special education status), especially in Math. Thus, we have institutionalized from the beginning of the year additional support periods for 6th grade in Math and ELA and we are launching our Success Mentors Program in October 2017. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of Administration and 100% of teachers will be supporting students through weekly Success Mentors meetings with the goal of a 50% decrease of students considered "promotion in doubt" and/or attending summer-school. Principal and Assistant Principal will gather and analyze evidence to identify strengths and needs of Success Mentor system vis-à-vis teachers, students and parents. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ADVANCE Observations of Practice, crosswalk and align with Assistant Principal Observations, peer Intervisitations and other supports for teaching practice. All Teachers & Assistant Principal Sept- May Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teacher, All Teachers All Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and Assistant Principal students June-Oct All Teachers & Administrators September-June All Teachers & Administators Review of ADVANCE, Performance Series, and New York State Data to establish initial student intervention group and on-going focus areas for individual teacher and collective staff development (SWD) Launching of 2016-17 Inquiry Cycle including Administrative Review and Implementation and Data Driven Instructional Tool/Inquiry Team, and Mastery Connect (Writing) Baselines (SWD). Targeted teachers receive training on Restore 360 from Morningside Center. Targeted Teachers October-December Morningside Center, Lead Teacher Support Students receive push-in support from Sanctuary for Families Advisory October-June Sanctuary for Families, /Health Groups Parents & Students October-June Advisory/Health Team Parent Coordinator, Elevate Education, PAC, Principal & Assistant Principal Schedule Teacher/Student/Parent Workshops in collaboration with Elevate Education. Elevate Education introduces students to the fundamental skills that they need to build across middle and high school in order to develop a strong study skills platform. Skills covered:  Dynamic reading- How to read a text and pull out the key points rather than simply summarizing every sentence. 2018-19 CEP 32  Note taking- How to get those key points into a set of organized notes that will facilitate effective learning.  Conceptual learning skills- How to understand how the  information fits together. Independent learning skills- What independent learning means and how to get it done. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Success Mentor will have monthly conversation with parents as documented by JupiterGrade book anecdotals. Success Mentor will facilitate at least one team level conference with student and family. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will receive training from Morningside Center on Restorative Justice Practices  Weekly support from Advisory Lead to ensure fidelity to curriculum  Manhattan East Data Driven Instruction Tool (DDIT) will document student progress via an analysis of Jupiter, Performance Series and/or MasteryConnect. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018 all students who have failed one quarter of a core course will have a Success Mentor supporting them on a bi-weekly level (minimum) and making at least monthly contact with family. 2018-19 CEP 33  Math, ELA and Regents Class progress as documented in MasteryConnect, JupiterGrades, and administrative observations and teacher reflections will be used to identify and monitor students quarterly (November, February, April, June). Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS ELA exam will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). JupiterGrades and PC database for monitoring of parent engagement at official and un-official conferences with Success Mentor families will also be monitored. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math, ELA and Regents Class progress as documented in MasteryConnect, JupiterGrades, and administrative observations and teacher reflections will be used to identify and monitor students quarterly (November, February, April, June). Summative assessment review of 2018 NYS ELA exam will also be conducted to measure achievement of Annual Goal (s). JupiterGrades and PC database for monitoring of parent engagement at official and un-official conferences with Success Mentor families will also be monitored. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent Advisory Council for the school (PAC) and School Leadership Team (SLT) reviewed parent engagement data, specifically attendance data at various activities. It was noted that PAC Meeting attendance is low and declines after November, though attendance at celebratory events remained constant (approximately 30% family engagement, not including attendance at Family Conferences). The PAC seeks to increase Parent participation in all school activities throughout the year, especially at PAC Meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the school will increase parent engagement and involvement by 10-15% and provide parents with the information and training needed to become more effectively involved in school decision making and in college/career planning for their children. The projected increase in parental engagement will be monitored via attendance at Monthly Events and activities, 2018-19 CEP 35 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Sept- June Administration & Parent Coordinator Parents Sept- June Parent Coordinator, Teachers & Administrators Parent Coordinator, Teachers & Administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will be offered access to the school’s computer lab to utilize the online gradebook to facilitate communication between the Parents, Teachers & administration. The online gradebook has the ability to provide translation into Spanish, the predominant language in the community. In addition, time has been allocated to Parents for Grade Level Team meetings as part of our open door policy. Parent open school mornings will occurs every Tuesday as a means of increasing parent connectivity and support for recruitment. The PAC will support student performance in the Arts and Academics by hosting showcases/celebrations for Parents and Families. Parents, Students September- June Administrators will have an open door policy as well as email availability through an online grading program for ongoing communication between parents, students, Teachers & Administrators. Parents, Families, Teachers Sept- June Teachers & Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Global Kids. Inc Stanley Isaacs Center: Beacon Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of the online gradebook, Jupitergrades.com; insure the computer room is available for Parent use; Teachers have time on Tuesdays for Family Meetings; Insure all Blue Cards are up to date; Alignment of SLT/PAC meetings with monthly school events. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the month of January the school will evaluate the participation rate of Parents and Families at school functions. School projects a 50% improvement rate in terms of parental attendance at events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data on parent Jupiter utilization and analysis of participation rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day & afterschool Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest third on State ELA exam Mathematics Lowest third on State math exam Small readingGroups, Writing process, repeated readings, peer editing, utilize running records and performance series for assessments. Focus on open ended questions from Ready CCLS NY Workbooks, CCLS Clinic Small group Workbooks, Short Subjects in Mathematics, Focus on Math strands, Buckle down math to the common core state standards, Buckle down NYS, Problem solving from Strategies for Success, utilize prior state exams for assessments, organizational skills, directed and focused instruction on identified areas of Small group During school day & afterschool 2018-19 CEP 38  Science Teacher assessment & Student request Social Studies Teacher assessment & student request strengths and weaknesses. ● Diagnostic, cumulative and summative assessments ● Guided practice for understanding common core concepts Focus on open ended questions from Ready CCLS NY Workbooks, CCLS Clinic Workbooks, Kool Math website Buckle down science review, teacher designed assessment, mini-labs, reinstruction on targeted topics based on assessments, organizational skills and alignment with the ILSE. ● Diagnostic, cumulative and summative assessments ● Guided practice for understanding common core concepts ● Performance tasks to practice science process skills Focus on constructed response questions DBQ preparation, writing workshop, review of map skills, organizational skills Small group or one on one During school day & afterschool Small group, one-on-one During school day & afterschool 2018-19 CEP 39  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Diagnostic, cumulative and summative assessments ● Guided practice for understanding common core concepts ● Reading for knowledge and information Focus on open ended questions Student based goals, socio-emotional and academic Teacher referral, Parental request, Student request Varies depending on student need Varies depending on student need 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have approximately 10 students in transitional housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We support our STH students with scholarships to school events and activities and one-to-one support, For 2017-18, we will be collaborating with the Stanley Isaac's Beacon Program and the 100 Schools Project to provide wrap-around supports and preventive services including in-home family support if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All Teachers at Manhattan East are certified in their content areas by New York State. The Teachers are provided leadership opportunities by administration such as mentoring peers, SLT Chairperson, leading Teacher Teams, Facilitating Professional Development sessions of best practices. The Staff are encouraged to seek out preferred PD workshops provided by City and State agencies as well as universities, Museums, Scientific Institutions, etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Staff are encouraged to seek out preferred PD workshops provided by City and State agencies as well as universities, Museums, Scientific Institutions, etc. We offer regular Professional Development sessions based on the needs of the staff and the Chancellor’s Instructional Goals for the year. These sessions are provided by the administration, New Visions for Public Schools, NYCDOE, UFT, and Community School District 4. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in one-to-one conferences with administrators and meet as a school community to analyze data. As a part of this process teachers have developed rubrics and assessments aligned to the curricula that can be utilized across the grades and content areas. These tools are used to inform curricula and adjustment of instruction. In addition, our Teaching Matters Coach works closely with teachers inputting and with teachers and administration on analysing and construction school-wide and teacher-based interventions, 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 14-20 N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $69,583 0 0 0 0 2018-19 CEP 44  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 45   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA//State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Manhattan East encourages and recruits trasformative parental partnership through the School Leadership Team and the Parents Advisory (Action) Council. The school also proactively engages parental partnership with students at risk br providing each who is at risk for being promotion in doubt with a Success Mentor to partner with the family. In addition Manhattan East also provides each family with a Parent Handbook which should include resource information (i.e., what to know and who to call at the school, local CBOs, helpful websites for families, school non-negotiables, etc.), as well as a monthly school calendar/newsletter. Afterschool Tuesday's are dedicated for parental contact and meetings and parents are invited to walk our halls every week with parent tours or without. The school will also further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 49  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Manhattan East School for Arts & Academics , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 CEP 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 4 School Name Manhattan East School for Arts & Academi Borough Manhattan School Number 224 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Luis M. Genao Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Berquis Arias Teacher/Subject Area Dejah Lynch, Spec Ed Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Stephanie Danoff, Speech Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Melissa Cancel Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Angie Ortiz Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Bryan Marsey, Data Analyst C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 178 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 2 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Performance SeriesMastery ConnectRunning RecordsBaseline/Benchmark Assessments 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher meets with the ELA coach on a weekly basis to review lesson plans and daily instruction to ensure that the necessary support are in place to aid our ELLs such as graphic organizers, glossaries are provided, etc.. In addition, the ENL teacher will provide her expertise in modifying the materials and scaffolds used. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 55  Performance SeriesMastery ConnectRunning RecordsCSD 4 Writing Assessment Pilot 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher meets weekly with the ELA coach to determine whether the interventions are applicable to each ELL. If the interventions need to be modified, the ENL teacher will make the necessary adjustments and monitor how well they are working. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL teacher uses the most recent NYSESLAT scores to determine the level of the student and how many hours of services will he/she need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After the ENL teacher and programming director analyze the NYSESLAT scores, they program the mandated hours of services for each student in their daily schedule. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. *Standalone - The ENL teacher teaches Social Studies Word Generation for all 6th graders. *Integrated - The ENL teacher will integrate with the ELA classes in the 6th, 7th, and 8th grade. Students are grouped heterogeneously. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Using the NYSESLAT results, the school schedules each ELL according to their mandated instructional minutes. The ENL teacher will integrate ELA supporting students during classes, as well as stand alone according to their mandated hours. In addition, students will receive Spanish classes as part of their HLA needs. Our Ells are comprised of 11 of Spanish as their home language and 1 as Chinese. The ENL teacher will provide Google translations and/or glossaries to aid this one student. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 56  During the core contents: Math, Science, ELA, and Social Studies, the ENL teacher uses the following strategies to guide content comprehension: *translation *explains task and content *provides graphic organizers and glossaries in respective language *uses laptop when needed 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As 11 of the 12 ELLs Spanish as their home language, the Spanish teacher provides instruction for them. The Spanish teacher uses a baseline test at the beginning of the school year to assess their level in each modality. Then, on a quarterly basis, the Spanish teacher will assess them on their progress. Regarding the 1 Chinese student, the ENL teacher will use Google translations and Chinese/English glossary to assess his progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: While we do not have any SIFE at this time, in the event that we get them during the year, the ENL teacher will use the NYSITELL scores to provide stand alone and integrated mandated hours. In addition, ENL teacher will meet with counselor and parents to provide the necessary socio and emotional support. Student will be provided with scaffolds through oral interaction and If available will be paired with a student of the same country to be his/her mentor. b. Newcomer: In addition to the mandated standalone and integrated services where the ENL teacher will provide the necessary scaffolds, students will receive translation via Google and Chinese/English glossary; laptop will be used as necessary. Sometimes classwork and homework will be translated as needed. c: Developing: Although these students will have less translation and interpretation, these students will receive instruction based in ENL strategies, including the use of graphic organizers, sentence starters, cloze sentences, conversation starters, modeling, think time, talk time, and group work, among others. d. Long Term: These students will be monitored through the lens of the four modalities to see where are they struggling. An emphasis in instruction is placed in their area of need, without ignoring the other modalities of language learning. e. Former ELLs: These students are grouped in the same class as the current ELLs so they are subject to the same quality instruction that scaffolds for language. All of the above students receive time and a half, not just during testing, but for the daily activities they participate in. We also accommodate this time in our planning and instruction for the Do Nows, group work, sharing, exit tickets, etc.. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Currently the students are identified as targeted students for grade level inquiry team review. In this way, the teacher teams discuss their performance at the grade level meetings via Intervention Tracker. As a part of this practice the teachers select or design appropriate groups, regularly review student data collected from teacher observations, Jupiter grade book, and Mastery Connect. In addition, the teachers discuss options for insuring all students are exposed to grade level texts, are receiving high quality instruction aligned with the Danielson rubric, use visual aids when appropriate and supplement with Technology as appropriate. All students have access to laptops for instruction and in order to insure they are able to effectively edit their materials. Furthermore, all teachers will be trained in QTEL which will reinforce language acquisition through content based instruction, content and language objectives, building background knowledge comprehensible input, differentiating ideas accommodating students experiencing cultural dissonance. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 57  Teachers have integrated the needs of ELL's into the teacher team meetings. They are among the targeted students for grade level inquiry team review. In addition, the Lead Special Education teacher and the Special Ed teachers are on the grade level teams to ensure that the student IEP's are being met in appropriate manners. The Speech teacher provides suggestions for working with their students' unique needs. The ELLs-SWDs are also receiving instruction as Stand Alone and Integrated and is available to teachers as a resource for suggestions regarding providing them and all students with techniques for increasing reading comprehension, note-taking, critical thinking, and written expression. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Both ELLs and FELLs are targeted by the grade level teachers teams in order to insure that the student's needs are being met. Using the Intervention Trackers, teams designate specific skills that they will work on developing, materials they will use, conduct evaluations of the students growth and determine additional supports will be provided for specific students. These may include a peer mentor, more scaffolded instructions, the use of a glossary/dictionary, the use of graphic organizers, specific groupings of students based on tasks, and the addition of technology when deemed appropriate. Once the team determines the student's individual needs and accommodations, they are utilized in ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies, and Spanish. All of the support services for ELL's with SWD are mandated by their IEPs. Additional services identified by the teacher team would be identified based on student performance during the team meeting and would be specific to the curriculum they are receiving. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we are including Word Generation which addresses all modalities, includes visuals and topics related to the Common Core Standards. It also builds academic vocabulary, critical thinking through debate, writing, reading which helps students how to use and comprehend informational texts. Furthermore, it is cross disciplinary. Currently, the school has laptops specifically for the SWD. These laptops support their writing in the classroom and allow the teachers to bring Khan Academy to support differentiation in Math. In addition, all of the teachers have SmartBoards in their classrooms which allow them to integrate technology. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELLs are SWD, therefore, the instruction they receive is primarily mandated by their IEP as well as their supports. All students are fully integrated for electives as well as physical education. All of the students receive Art and Music instruction. Students select elective courses on a for with their parent's assistance. The after school program is fully integrated and includes tutoring which is open to all students. In the addition, the computer room is accessible to students for their school work. Furthermore, the after school programs are coordinated by Global Kids, Stanley Isaac, and Design to Learn-Science which offer a variety of choices such as sport, science, homework tutoring, media, leadership, academics, among others. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The students have been provided with laptops. Every classroom has a SmartBoard. Teachers have and utilize graphic organizers, ELMOs, and glossaries. Both ELLs and FELLs are targeted by the grade level teacher teams in order to insure that the students' needs are being met. The teams designate specific skills that they will work on developing, materials they will use, conduct evaluations of the student's growth and determine if additional supports will be provided for specific students. These may include a peer mentor, more scaffolded instructions, the use of glossaries, the use of graphic organizers, specific groupings of students based on tasks, and the addition of technology when deemed appropriate. Once the team determines the students' individual needs and accommodations, they will be utilized in ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies, and Spanish. Students also utilize a variety of textbooks, common core clinic books, laptops, and websites such as Khan Academy. 2018-19 CEP 58  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only have ENL which comprises of Stand Alone and Integrated. The students also receive Spanish as the home language (HL) instruction: 4 times per week for Seventh graders and 3 times per week for Eighth graders. Students are encouraged to share cultural information through organized class activities. All students will have a baseline at the beginning of the year and on a quarterly basis, the ENL/Spanish will use her own assessment to monitor progress. As for our Asian student, the ENL teacher will monitor his HL progression with the help of the parents. In addition, the ENL teacher will use informal observations to assess progress through classroom activities and peer interaction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since all of our ELL's are SWD, all of the support services are mandated by their IEP's. Additional services identified by the teacher team are based on student performance during the team meeting and would be specific to the curriculum they are receiving. All ELLs, regardless of language, are exposed to grade level appropriate materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we share the building with two charter schools, we do not share resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As part of the school process, we hold an orientation. During the orientation, translation is provided as needed. The orientation includes the following: 1) Parents are introduced to key staff such as the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, and Teachers, as well as Parent Association body. 2) Parents and students are given a tour of the school. 3) Parents and students review after school programs and identify their interest via a form. 4) During this time, parents and students are given their supply list, the DOE and school's calendar, blue emergency cards, parent volunteer form, and the English assignment for those who attend the orientation prior to Summer vacation. 5) On a regularly basis, tour of the building is conducted twice a month. 6) Newly enrolled are pair up with a student mentor to assist with travelling between classes and answering any questions that arises. Furthermore, the school's grading system, Jupiter, allows communication between parents and staff as necessary. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students are offered Spanish 4 times a week for Seventh graders and 3 times a week for Eighth graders. Eighth graders will be eligible to take the Second Language Proficiency Exam so that they can earn 1 High School credit. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 59  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers, including the ENL teacher, will be attending a 4-day QTEL professional development as a 2-sessions in September and 2-sessions in October. In early August, the ENL teacher attended a 2-days professional development for assisting with the LAP process. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers, including the ENL teacher, will be attending a 4-day QTEL professional development as a 2-sessions in September and 2-sessions in October. In early August, the ENL teacher attended a 2-days professional development for assisting with the LAP process. Also, the ENL teacher will attend district-based professional development as part of her continued enrichment. All agendas and attendance sheets are kept in a binder in the main office and maintained as part of each staff's Professional development portfolio. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher, along with the Parent Coordinator, schedules a 1-1 meeting at least twice a year to discuss goals of the ENL program, student's language development progress based on school and NYCDOE/NYS assessments, home language progress, as well as language development needs in all content areas. When necessary, translation services will be provided. All agendas and timesheets will be kept in ENL binders. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELLs participate in all of our school events. As a part of our Parent Advisory Committee (PAC) meetings and school events, we provide translation services in order to insure they are receiving the information as effectively as our non-ELL parents. The ENL teacher as well as the Parent Coordinator supports the communication between the staff and the families. As a resource, our grade book automatically translates grade information and emails into Spanish (11 out of 12 of our ELLs). Our parents participate in our annual International Feast, computer training, talent shows, Curriculum Night, among many. The needs of our ELL families are shared in a variety of data. The Learning Environment survey provides input from the student families and the PAC provides information to the school on the needs of the parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All students participate in the annual International Feast showcasing their cultural gastronomy. Students have participated in school based spelling bees in English. 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Luis Genao, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Manhattan East School DBN: 04M224 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Luis M. Genao Title Principal Melissa Cancel Assistant Principal Angie Ortiz Parent Coordinator Berquis Arias ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Dejah Lynch, Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Bryan Marsey Other Data Analyst Antonio Quiros Other School Aide Stephanie Danoff Other Speech Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 64  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 65  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 66 
