2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M242 School Name: P.S. 242 - THE YOUNG DIPLOMATS MAGNET ACADEMY Principal: DENISE GOMEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Young Diplomats Magnet Academy 03M242 03M242 Pre-K-5 134 West 122 nd Street NYC 10027 (212)678-2908 School Number (DBN): (212)678-2927 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Denise Desjardin Dgomez5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Denise Desjardin Kerry Cutrone Denise Johnson Ann McKayle ShaquoyaCarr N/A N/A N/A District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 W. 93 rd St. NY, NY 10025 Ialtchu@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212)678-5857 Phone Number: (212)222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Ave, 8 th floor NY, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (917) 339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Desjardin Kerry Cutrone Denise Johnson Paula Wielingen Russell Dennis Ann McKayle IffatHossain *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Johnson Joseph Jones ShaquoyaCarr Gwinette Thomas Maria Noguiera TyimaishaEllis Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview We all have greatness within us and every child has limitless potential that must be nurtured. Members of the Young Diplomats Magnet Academy will draw this potential out of every scholar and continuously strive for success. As a result, each scholar will be equipped with the tools to become responsible citizens in a changing world. Young 2018-19 CEP 9  Diplomats Magnet Academy is dedicated to providing all students with a caring, supportive, and rigorous inquiry-based learning environment. Young Diplomats Magnet Academy is a school in which all students are encouraged to be open-minded towards acquiring a global perspective. Together we will target student strengths and interests as a motivational tool to be reflective risk-takers. Students of different abilities, interests or learning needs will experience equally appropriate ways to absorb, use, develop and present concepts as effective communicators. The entire school community is committed to helping develop knowledgeable, balanced and principled thinkers, skills needed to become socially responsible members of a diverse society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school has been authorized as an International Baccalaureate school. As an IB school, we will focus on the development of the whole child as an inquirer, both in the classroom and in the world. The most distinctive and significant features of the International Baccalaureate program are the six transdisciplinary themes. These themes are about issues that are important to us. The six themes of global significance create a transdisciplinary framework that allow students to go beyond the confines of learning within subject areas. Young Diplomats Magnet Academy offers French language instruction to all of our students. The Magnet theme is integrated with the New York State Scope & Sequence in Social Studies and Science through hands-on inquiry and research. There was a great deal of planning required by our teachers as the only authorized International Baccalaureate offering the Primary Years Programme in the New York City Department of Education. One of our strengths is the way our teachers plan and collaborate to update their units of study so that they are aligned to the CCLS and IB standards. This is done during common preparation periods and during our Monday professional development sessions. Teacher teams will continue to build on engaging in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve curricular, teaching and learning. Our school will continue to benefit from a partnership with Harlem Children’s Zone. HCZ is a non-profit, preventive service agency. Peacemakers are used to enhance student learning in K-5 classrooms by working with students individually and in small groups during the school day as well as after school. Peacemakers work closely with teachers, administration and coaches. Catholic Charitiesp also provides our students with an after-school enrichment program and Out-of-School Time program. We will focus on improving the quality of writing in our learning community to increase student performance in literacy and mathematics. All teachers will work in teams to look at student work in both content areas by assessing the work using rubrics and the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers have aligned the Ready Gen literacy and writing units with our International Baccalaureate units to support our efforts in improving the quality of writing. Current strategies for improving instruction and student performance in English Language Arts will include the ongoing implementation of Ready Gen. In addition, our SETSS teacher provides intervention services for students in grades K-5. All grades (K-5) are using Go Math as the primary vehicle for math instruction. Our goal is to better prepare students in meeting standardized test criteria. Additionally, all grade levels participate in a music/dance program with various Community Based Organizations (Community Works and Rosie’s Theater Kids) to create and develop culminating events that are aligned to the Social Studies/Science curriculum. Teachers will collaborate with an Generation Ready consultant and Art teacher to design grade appropriate projects connected to these units of study. 2018-19 CEP 10  The school will offer monthly workshops for our parents in areas such as Literacy, Mathematics, Science and other topics that provide parents with information and strategies that they can use to support their children at home. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students in temporary housing require additional support with busing and counseling because of the constant displacement. Also, some of them rely on meals and weekend events that are provided by our school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have improved on assessment in instruction as per our Quality Review visit. Our teachers are constantly reviewing data to modify instruction throughout our units of study to meet the needs of our students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M242 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 170 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 85.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 32.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.72 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 43 88.9% 2.9% 26.5% 60.0% 0.6% 4.7% 0 5% 7.3 22.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting an analysis of student performance on state assessments, it was determined that the majority of students did not perform well on the NYS ELA exam. In fact, our school decreased the proficiency level by 4%. As a result we have made student performance for our grade 3, 4 and 5 students in ELA a priority goal for the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade level teacher teams will increase the cognitive demand of their ELA performance tasks, resulting in 3% increase in student proficiency on the grades 3-5 NYS ELA exams. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on pre-assessment data for Unit 1. Students Grades K-5 Sept. 2018 Grade Level Team teachers Grades K-5 Oct. 2018 Oct. 2018 Dec. 2018 Dec. 2018 Feb. 2019 Feb. 2019 Apr. 2019 Apr. 2019 May 2019 May 2019 June 2019 ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data to create next steps for Unit 2. ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on next steps from previous unit as well as pre-assessment for unit 2. ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data to create next steps for unit 3. ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on next steps from previous unit as well as pre-assessment for unit 3. ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data to create next steps for unit 4. ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on next steps from previous unit as well as pre-assessment for unit 4. ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data to create next steps for unit 5. ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on next steps from previous unit as well as pre-assessment data for unit 5. ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data to create next steps for unit 6. ● Teachers will collaborate to plan tasks based on next steps from previous unit as well as pre-assessment data for unit 6. ● Teachers will collaborate to look at post-assessment data from unit 6. Teacher teams will receive professional development in designing Common Core Learning Standards aligned tasks that provide multiple rigorous learning opportunities. Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Manhattan Field Team Support Members 2018-19 CEP 14 Students grades K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers grades K-5 Students K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers grades K-5 Annotated student work and graded example will be discussed and analyzed during weekly common planning and weekly teacher team meetings using a protocol. Grade level teams will meet minimally three times a month to look at student work to identify patterns/trends and tweak their units when necessary. Each teacher will identify three students, one low performing, meeting standards and one exceeding standards to analyze their work and establish next steps. They will look at the pre-assessment (on demand writing) mid assessment and summative task. This data is then shared in cohorts (Grades K-2 and Grades 3-5) with Administration to monitor student progress and next steps in each grade. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The progress of this goal will be discussed during our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade level team teachers will have 2 common preparation periods to meet and plan the tasks. They will also receive additional preps provided by our Cluster teachers to plan and look at student work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have increased the cognitive demand of six instructional tasks, resulting in a 3%increase in student proficiency in the mid year ELA assessment. Teachers will use the data from our pre, mid and post assessments from each unit to assess student understanding and progress. Additionally, they will prepare and plan higher level questions to assess student understanding which will drive their instruction. They will analyze student work to monitor progress made as a class and grade level. The analysis of data will help teachers assess their students to tweak the units and meet their individual needs. This practice of constantly monitoring student learning throughout the units of study resulted in the proficiency levels increasing on the state tests last year. We will also use the data from our Fountas & Pinnell to monitor student growth in reading. Teachers will revise the goals established in the beginning of the year that are created based on the baseline assessments in the beginning of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers will use the performance task rubric in lower grades and the standardized test rubric to assess student summative tasks. The progress of formative assessment will be assessed during classroom observations. There should be growth in domain 3d. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our data, our attendance rate has decreased. Our thinking is that the attendance rate decreased because of the students that are in temporary housing. Many of them are moved around the city and chose to keep them at our school for some stability. However, the family usually struggled with transportation. As a result, we will work on increasing our student attendance rate. Our community will continue to provide a supportive environment while sharing high expectations for attendance which will improve student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the school attendance rate from 90% to 92% as a result of targeted interventions for at risk students designed and implemented by the school attendance team. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will continue to hold monthly award assemblies to acknowledge students that have perfect attendance. Students Parents will be acknowledged for making sure that their child has perfect attendance on a monthly basis. Parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Attendance team will meet monthly to address the needs of our STH students or high risk students. Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Attendance team will schedule meetings with parents of students that have attendance issues and explain the high expectations of our school and CCLS. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Parent Coordinator and Attendance Team Parent Coordinator and Attendance Team Parent Coordinator and Attendance Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The progress of this goal will be discussed during our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The attendance committee will meet during the day. The team members are out of classroom personnel that do not require coverage. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  By February 2019, through the implementation of targeted interventions for at risk students, our school's attendance will indicate a 2% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The attendance team will use the monthly attendance reports to monitor the decrease of chronic attendance issues. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the data of the NYS ELA exam as well as end of unit writing tasks, it was evident that all of our students need to improve in their reading and writing. They will analyze constructed response proficiency through the use of the rubrics used to grade the standardized tests. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher grade level team members will collaboratively analyze student performance tasks and end of unit reading and writing assessments, resulting in a 10% increase on the constructed response questions on the state ELA exams. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade level teams will have minimally two common planning preps to plan collaboratively. The professional development plan will include time on a monthly basis to look at student work and monitor their progress with writing constructed responses. Teachers will use a protocol to analyze student work and provide each other with feedback. Monthly workshops will be offered to our parents so that they can better understand the CCLS and provide them with strategies to use at home with their children. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Grade Level Team Leaders Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Grade Level Team Leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator and teachers Students performing at the lowest third percent. Students performing at the lowest third percent. ELL, students with disabilities and performing at the lowest third percent. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Information will be discussed during our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use benchmark assessments that will assess student ability to infer. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 21  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 16% of students will be proficient on their mid-year MOSL. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. State exam results will be used to assess progress of this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on school wide MOSL data and feedback from our Advance, 3d (using assessment in instruction) has been identified as an area in which we need to further develop. We would like to increase the average that was 2.54 last year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through differentiated professional development plans for teachers, by June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ ability to use questioning and discussion techniques to engage students in critical thinking, resulting in a 10% school wide average increase in teachers improving on the component 3d in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will engage in setting professional goals with an administrator while using the Danielson Framework for Teaching as a guide. Individual professional development plans will be developed and implemented with the goal increased focus on using questioning and discussion techniques. Self assessment and reflection by teachers (identifying current practice and own next steps to improve). PD plan aligned with priority competencies (Danielson Framework- 3d). Observation with timely feedback. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers. Sept. 2018 School Administrator. Classroom teachers. Classroom teachers. Classroom teachers Sept. 2018- May 2019 Sept. 2018-May 2019 Classroom Teachers. Administration Sept. 2018-May 2019 School Administrator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The progress of this goal will be discussed during our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be provided training on Danielson Framework Indicator 3d during the Monday Professional Development time. Additionally, post observation feedback will be given with an emphasis on using tools to assess student understanding. Teachers will use data to create and modify reading strategies that will help ensure student achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school-wide average for 3d will indicate a 10% increase as measured by Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The MOSL data on the Advance system will be used to monitor the growth of teacher practice in Danielson Framework component 3d. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year we worked on increasing parent involvement and were successful. There was an increase in the parents attending parent evens such as PTA meetings, workshops and Monthly Celebrations held in the classrooms. We met our goal but would like to increase it by another 15% since having a strong partnership between school and home proves to increase student achievement. The strong partnership will result in parents being better equipped to support their child at home. Additionally, we will provide parent surveys with an increase in the percentage of satisfaction of workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of our family outreach plan, there will be a 5% increase on the "Strong Family Ties" section of the NYC Survey. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on the CCLS. Parents Sept. 2018 Parent coordinator Parents Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Parent Coordinator Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Parents Feb. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers The school provides a parent newsletter to keep parents informed of the current units of study and upcoming events. Parents are invited into the school for their child’s performance during monthly assemblies to see how we are able to integrate the content areas with the arts. Parents are invited to attend monthly Celebrations of Learning while students present their inquiry projects. Parents are able to hear the peer feedback which will help them better understand the standards and expectations. Teachers will call parents to provide ongoing information on their child's progress. This will be done on Tuesdays during the time that is allocated for parent engagement. Lower grade teachers will call on the first Tuesday of the month and upper grade teachers will call on the second Tuesday of the month. They will also receive monthly progress report cards to be provided with updated data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The progress of this goal will be discussed during our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers will be asked to facilitate monthly workshops based on results from a survey that will be distributed to our parents in September. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parents will indicate a 100% satisfaction on a school-developed survey aligned with to the Strong Family Ties section of the NYC survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use sign-in sheets and the Learning Environment Survey results as a form of measuring this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Instruction will provided in a small group setting. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention Services for ELA are provided during the school day. Teachers work with flexible small groups during daily math instruction. Academic Intervention Services for Math are provided during the school day. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Imagine Learning, MyOn reading, Fountas & Pinnell Intervention kit and guided reading groups help to reinforce decoding, comprehension, writing and speaking skills –small group and one to one tutoring. Go Math games, Go Math online activities, manipulatives, analysis and organization of word problems- flexible small groups. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) First priority for AIS is given to students in grades 4 and 5 AIS based on their State exam results. Students in grades 3-5 are next identified by the results of the fall Fountas & Pinnell assessments in reading. Students in grades K-2 are identified as “at risk” by the Fountas & Pinnell assessments. Students in grade 4 and 5 are first determined to be eligible for AIS based on their State exam results. Students in grades 3-5 are next identified by the fall results of their initial baseline math assessments. Teachers of all grades use results from pre assessments in all math units, checklists and observations to identify students 2018-19 CEP 29 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) requiring at risk services. Students who did not pass the Grade 4 Science assessment and those struggling to acquire new skills and information as determined by teacher observations and class assignments are identified as students requiring at risk support. Students struggling to acquire new skills and information as determined by teacher observations and class assignments are identified as students requiring at risk support. Teachers and parents request intervention for those students who are struggling with school-related anxiety, feelings of isolation, peer conflicts or difficulty with social skills. Inquiry based instruction is used to align the Science instruction with our literacy block-small groups, pairs or independently. Teachers have embedded the Social Studies curriculum in their literacy block. Students are provided with inquiry based projects and learning throughout their literacy block. Services include peer mediation, crisis intervention, parent conferences and referrals for other services within the school community, small group and one on one with guidance counselors. Students are provided with small group instruction to provide them with additional support. Teachers work with small groups and student work independently or with pairs with online resources along with level content based text. Teachers work with small groups and student work independently or in pairs with online resources along with level content based text. Academic Intervention Services for Science are provided during the school day. Academic Intervention Services for Social Studies are provided during the school day. Counseling/intervention sessions can be conducted in a group or individual setting. At-risk services will be provided during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students in temporary housing will be provided with 3 school uniforms along with school supplies. Additionally, families will meet with our Parent Coordinator to discuss any concerns or individualized support that their family needs. We will continue to work with the Social Workers of the shelters if there is an attendance matter or the family requires more assistance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. When looking for new teachers, the following are utilized:  Job fairs  Colleague Recommendations/Referrals  Interviewing candidates from open market  Resumes sent by colleges and universities All teachers participate in frequent cycles of coaching/feedback with administrators to reflect on pedagogy to support student achievement. The following are systems in place for teachers: ● We have contracted a Generation Ready consultant to help teachers with their planning and ensuring that they are implementing the Common Core Learning Standards effectively. The Generation Ready consultant and teachers plan together for upcoming lessons that are co-taught. All classroom teachers are provided with 2-3 common preps with their grade level teams to meet and plan their units of study through the use of our Common Core Learning Standards. ● Administrators and Manhattan Support Personnel provide on-going training and support for teachers to plan 5-6 week units of study as a tool to drive instruction. Funding to hire per diem substitute teachers will be set aside for staff members to participate in debriefing sessions. ● Teachers are also participating in International Baccalaureate workshops that are mandated for certification. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 33  ● Our teachers attend high quality professional development from the city, cluster, support personnel and from our own teachers such as: Data Analysis Team provided a thorough analysis of our state test data and in house assessments. ● attend the Danielson Framework of Teaching Professional Development offered from the DOE ● K-5 classroom teachers of Go Math Professional Development offered from the DOE ● All K-5 and ESL teachers will be working with grade teams to analyze student work through the use of a protocol and the rubric used to assess the NYC Performance assessment. ● All teachers will have consultation days working one on a Generation Ready (Formerly known as AUSSIE). Service providers attend the trainings as well. ● Pre-K teachers attend Pre-Kindergarten DOE Professional Development sessions. ● Bi-monthly professional development with support staff on questioning (3b) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents in Pre-K will be provided with ongoing workshops for them to understand the CCLS and expectations. Additionally, they will receive the school monthly newsletter that contains information about content being covered in all grades as well as bi-weekly progress reports with detailed information about their child’s social/academic progress. The Kindergarten teachers meet with all parents and students who are entering Kindergarten for the upcoming school year. The parents are given a tour of the school by the Parent Coordinator or IB Coordinator, while the children are screened in literacy and math skills. The Kindergarten teachers host a luncheon for the parents and incoming students on the first half day of the school year for parents to be familiarized with the expectations and 2018-19 CEP 34  answer any questions. The IEP teacher meets with all incoming special education parents during registration to ensure that services will be provided from the first day of school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Pre-K teacher meets with colleagues and the literacy consultant to review student work and create action plans to address student needs. The teacher uses pre and post assessment administered for all units to drive instruction. Classroom teachers devised a task for each writing unit of study to be able to assess all students’ strengths and weaknesses within the writing CCLS. The teachers give students an on demand writing task as the beginning of the unit and use the rubric from the NYC Performance assessment to identify strengths and weaknesses which help them tweak and differentiate the instruction to meet their needs. They administer another on demand writing task 3 weeks into the unit to identify strengths and weaknesses so that they are able to modify the unit based on the student data and needs. This is also done at the end of the unit with the summative task to close the gaps within the individual student’s learning. Additionally, they identify three students, one low, medium and higher performing student and use a protocol to analyze the student work. Classroom teachers devised a performance task for each critical area in math to be able to assess all students’ strengths and weaknesses within the math CCLS. These critical areas enable the teachers to close the gaps within the individual student’s learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 131,507.00 69,309.00 0 0 1,470,250.00 X X X 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 36  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Young Diplomats Magnet Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Young Diplomats Magnet Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Young Diplomats Magnet Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 40  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 42  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Young Diplomats Magnet Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 242 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Denise Desjardian Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Galyna Shaller Teacher/Subject Area Kerry Cutrone/3 rd grade Teacher/Subject Area Abigail Gannon/SETSS Related-Service Provider Ariel Friedman/Speech Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Anthony Arias Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 45  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 199 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.04% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers use the Fountas/Pinnell Assessment Program quarterly each academic year. Teachers group students according to their reading levels for differentiated instruction and Guided Reading. Teachers and prinicpal analyze individual and class reading level results, NYS Tests and NYC Performance Assessment data. They group students by their abilities within classrooms and in AIS, and various push-in and pull-out programs. Each program runs in a 4-6 week cycle and is evaluated by the principal. In addition, each classroom teacher places students in literacy and math groups according to their common needs and instructional goals for 4-6 week cycles. The progress of the students in these groups is closely monitored by the classroom teachers during individual/group conferences and pre/post unit assessments. Teachers re-assess students after completion of each program's cycle. Teachers evaluate and monitor student progress on a regular basis in regards to regrouping students according to their new needs assessment. 2018-19 CEP 46  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the Young Diplomats Magnet Academy, PS 242, ENL program is attested to by the fact that ELLs who have passed the NYSESLAT perform at an exceptional level. While the ENL teacher monitors their progress, the ELL graduates include several students who are among the highest achieving students in their classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier I Whole group - Indicators of Progress: Running records, informal observation, conference notes, Children's Progress (K-2), Acuity (3-5), Unit tests. Lesson plans must show acess for ELLs using information for assessments. Tier II Re-administer F&P Running Records, Conference Notes, Anecdotal notes, F&P Leveled Literacy Intervention Assessments. Strenghs are identified and needs analysis is completed before planning small group instruction. Tier III F&P Leveled Literacy Intervention Assessments, Running Records, Conference Notes. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the NYSESLAT data, the following patterns were revealed: As this was the year when some changes in the NYSESLAT occurred, the scores from Listening and Writing which otherwise would have been higher seemed to have dropped slightly. We inferred it had to do with the fact that ELLs were required to use more academic vocabulary in addition to correct grammar. Thus, our focus is exposing students more to academic vocabulary and making them confident in using it. Additionaly, we will expose our students to more opportunities to exercise their fact-based and argumentative essay writing skills. The reports show that an English language learner's performance on the NYSESLAT is a strong predictor of whether he or she will meet standards on the State ELA exam. The implications for the school’s LAP and instruction are derived from the strengths and needs noted in the NYSESLAT and other assessments (NYSITELL, Teacher Assessments, and informal observations). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 47  a. Freestanding ENL program. Eligible students receive one or two units of ENL instruction from one full-time, fully certified ENL Teacher, Mrs. Shaller, as required by the results of the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT and based on CR 154 mandates. Instruction is highy differentiated and provided on either push-in and/or pull-out basis as appropriate. Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs pushed-in and pulled-out in small groups. Expanding and Commanding ELLs are serviced within push-in context, in which ENL teacher scaffolds the mainstream classroom lessons. All ENL instruction is provided in small groups according to their grade-level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Presently, there are two students in 2 nd grade who are identified as expanding and receive 180 min. a week of ENL instruction and two students as entering and receive 360 min. of ENL instruction. Two 3 rd grade students, among whom 1 students is identified as emerging and 1 as entering and receive 360 min. a week of ENL instruction. The next group includes two 4 th grade students, among whom there is one student at expending level and receives 180 min a week and 1 student is at the Emerging level and receives 360 min. Finally, there are six 5 th grade students, among them 2 students are at transitioning and 2 at expanding levels and receive 180 min. a week, 2 students at entering level and receive 360 min. of ENL instruction a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area instruction at Young Diplomats Magnet Academy is carefully planned within trans-disciplinary units of study that corelate between science and social studies and embraces all areas of curriculum that are deeply embeded and delivered through balanced literacy and mathematics. As an International Baccalauteate Candidate School, Young Diplomats Magnet Academy is not only following high expectations of the New York State Common Core Learning Standards but also the goals of the International Baccalaureate Organization. All our students, including ELL students, are exposed to learn through hands-on experiences, inquiries, and research based projects. Each unit of study begins with an introduction, composing and posting essential questions which students are learning to answer elaborately throughout the unit by making inquiries , working on experiments, calculating, measuring, constructing, and preparing individual and collaborative written reports. This inquiry method of study allows for multiple oportunities to use oral and written language through projects, research, discoveries, and discussions in whole/small group, as well as in partnerships. To infuse our content area instruction, our teachers, including the ENL teacher, use portions of various methods, such as CALLA , QTEL etc. In addition, we use visual aids, graphic organizers, and contemporary technology, such individual student laptops, ipads, interactive Smart Boards, Prometheans, ELMOs. In order to incorporate ENL strategies into the content area instruction, our ENL teacher plans with our grade-level teams and articulates with individual teachers about the progress of their students on a regular basis. On-going assessments help teachers differentiate instruction and assignments for groups and individual students, including ELLs, who are held accountable to set goals and objectives of the studies. Mutually established checklist and rubrics assist students during the process of the studies and determine their final grades. Constructive feedback from the teachers and peers about their final written reports and projects help them establish next steps for further improvement. 2018-19 CEP 48  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All our ELL students have multiple opportunities to use their Native Language skills throughout the school year. Young Diplomats Magnet Academy, PS 242, provides French language as one of its specials during prep. period classes, two times a week for students in grade K-3, and once a week for students in grades 3-5. Students whose native language is French listen, speak, sing, read and write in French classes. They also have many opportunities to use French in small groups among their peers and friends, with staff members who speak French, during gym, classroom assemblies, at lunch and recess. Our Native speakers of Spanish have opportunities to practice Spanish with many staff members who also speak Spanish in gym, assemblies, at lunch, and recess. In addition, native language dictionaries, glossaries, and books are available in each classroom. Finally, in Young Diplomats Magnet Academy, P.S. 242, we provide school-wide multicultural events which include performances that embrace different cultures and languages, including Spanish and French. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In the case of SIFE or special education students, the lessons are back-to-basics, to strenghen a shaky linguistic foundation: Dolch high frequency words, sight words, and grammar, for reading, writing, speaking and listening as required by ENL and ELA mandates. Currently, there are no SIFE students, but if and when they come to our school, performance data is used to gauge their progress and develop a plan of instruction for them. Presently, there are six ELL students who completed 6 years of ENL service. Performance data is used to measure their progress and develop a plan of instruction for them. ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers) are placed into a class with another child who speaks the same language, whenever possible and every effort is made to insure a smooth transition into the new school system both socially and academically. These students are grouped by abilities for small group ENL instruction. Basic survival English is taught. Focus is also placed on phonics and basic writing/ reading skills. Bilingual dictionaries are used to support students comprehension. Students within each ELL subgroup are grouped according to their speaking, listening, reading and writing levels as per NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, collaboration with classroom teacher levels and based on Fountas and Pinnell scores. Additional support for listening and speaking provided by scaffolded instruction utilizing methodologies such as read alouds, think, pair, share, etc. Currently, our school does not have ELL students who receiving service 7 or more years. In case of one, performance data will be used to measure their progress and develop a plan of instruction for them. Our students whose NYSESLAT test indicate proficiency levels are still offered 2 additional years of testing accommodations. They receiving 90 min. a week ENL service. In addition, the progress of these students is closely monitored and, if necessary, they receive AIS services. AIS teachers provide 4-6 week cycles of intensive literacy and math academic intervention services to all students, including ELLs, in grades 1-5 in small goup settings. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our Special Education ELLs receive their mandated ENL services in accordance with their IEPs, via push-in program. ENL instruction is provided in small groups with mainstream students. Instruction is differentiated based on student needs, abilites and IEPs. Identified for support from our AIS team. AIS providers, ENL teacher and classroom teachers are involved in an ongoing collaboration to match level specific programs geared toward the child reaching his/her particular goal. The following programs are utilized during evaluation and planning:Foundations, Level Literacy Intervention, Ready Gen, Wilson, ELL online programs (Starfall.com). Four languages are spoken by the staff of PS 242, which is very helpful in communicating with students and parents. Students also use websites and computer translations as learning tools to support native language as well as bilingual books and dictionaries. To infuse our content area instruction, our teachers, including the ENL teacher, use portions of various methods, such as CALLA, 2018-19 CEP 49  QTEL, and SIOP. In addition, we use visual aids, graphic organizers, and contemporary technology, such as individual student laptops and Ipads, interactive Smart Boards, Prometheans, ELMO's 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher, Speech teacher and other therapists meet at the beginning of the school year to organize scheduling, so that the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs are fully met and that the students receive all mandated services as per their IEPs. ENL teacher uses Common Core Learning Standards and collaborates with classroom teachers to support ELL-SWD. Our Ls-SWD served more as push-in than pull-out. Our school system allows scheduling flexibility that helps the ENL teacher to push-in or pull-out students based on what is currently going on in the classroom. The flexibility allows students to be pulled where the curriculum can be taught in a small group within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs receive rigorous grade level content area instruction. Our ENL program incorporates a wide variety of instructional age and grade level appropriate materials to support the learning of ELLs. To meet the standards in math, we utilize "Go Math" (in grades K-5). Within these programs our students have access to hands on manipulatives, books and are exposed to targeted math vocabulary. During the literacy block the students are instructed using content area resources based on their proficiency levels. Individual instruction and small group instruction is provided during this time. To meet the standards in ELA, our school has invested in the "Ready Gen" program, which helps to prepare our students for academic success. This program includes a writing model, big books, charts, leveled guided reading books, phonics chart with tapes, as well as test preparation materials. All grades utilize a variety of key teacher resources to support teaching and learning. The ENL teacher meets and articulates with all subject area teachers to infuse instruction. When possible, we try to use native language texts to support Social Studies, Mathematics and Science instruction , focusing on developing concepts and terminology. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In literacy, Ready Gen Program is implemented. In math, Go Math is used, along with various math games, math manipulatives, and math writing response. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any programs/services for our ELL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are provided with every opportunity to grow academically and participate in all school programs albeit academics, enrichment, sports and/or the arts during school as well as after school. Remedial and accelerated programs are offered to ALL students, including ELLs, based on needs, as determined by assessments. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is incorporated into instruction for all students, including ELLs. ENL and classroom teachers plan cooperatively to insure that technology is integrated and project based learning takes place throughout the day. The school uses Starfall. com programs (for newcomers), ELmo, Smartboards, laptops, Ipads and other resources and equipment for research and on-going projects. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 50  Newcomers are "buddied" up with students who speak their native language, whenever possible. Students use native language dictionaries and glossaries throughout the year. Few languages are spoken by the staff of PS 242, which is very helpful in communicating with students and parents. Students also use websites and computer translations as learning tools to support native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL instruction is provided in small groups according to their grade-level. We align all curriculum and instructional materials to the appropriate age and grade levels of our students. All instruciton is Common Core aligned. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology is incorporated into instruction for all students, including ELLs. ENL and classroom teachers plan cooperatively to insure that technology is integrated and project based learning takes place throughout the day. The school uses Starfall. com programs (for newcomers), ELmo, Smartboards, laptops, Ipads and other resources and equipment for research and on-going projects. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Each spring, we have an open house for parents of all incoming Kindergarten students, including potential ELLs. Parents receive information about the school and the ENL programs during this meeting and registration. Additional information is provided during ENL orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Children at the transitional stage of language acquisition require strategy development in reading stamina and vocabulary. Shared Reading opportunities, Students as Authors, Reader Theater and student performance provide transitional student's opportunities to hear repetitive language and gramatical structures by using emergent and early text levels. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL Teacher and pedagogical staff collaborate to conduct nine 50-minutes staff development sessions building-wide to teach other teachers the techniques used in ENL pedagogy. Professional development is strategically planned to focus on informing all pedagogical staff on the powerful specialized strategies for strengthening the literacy and academic performance of our ELL students. Sessions are conducted during grade conferences, faculty conferences, and assigned professional development opportunities, both in-house and through outside service providers. Staff development is designed to meet the needs of the new teachers as well as the veteran pedagogues. An important element that continues to be reinforced is the 2018-19 CEP 51  need to differentiate and scaffold instruction for all students, including our English Language Learners and special needs children. Teachers are informed on ways in which the classroom can provide an inviting and nurturing learning environment that supports the building of an ELL’s self-esteem and developing confidence in a new language. The ENL Teacher uses the opportunities to turnkey region-wide ELL professional development sesions. Topics addressed include: What is the Language Allocation Policy? Applying ELL Assessments, Integrating new ELLs into classroom teachers to track progress of ELLs. Workshop topics to be covered by 2015-2016 school years are the following: Levels of English Literacy development and language analysis, Test taking strategies, Common Core for the Not so Common Learners. The goal of the LAP team is to ensure that Young Diplomats Magnet Academy, P.S. 242, including administration, teachers and all support staff has the necessary resources and support to improve instruction for ELLs. In the area of resources, the following instructional materials are used; abridged versions of American and international classsics, classroom libraries with various genres and reading levels in both English, French, and Spanish, a school library with multicultural literature in English, French, and Spanish languages, a teacher resource room with sets of guided reading books in all levels, fiction/nonfiction level books, leveled books for all units of study taught at school in literacy/math/social studies/science, computer internet access, bilingual dictionaries and glosaries in Spanish/English and French/English. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff receives professional development to support ELLs as they transition to middle school from our Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator. Staff is invited to attend Family Open Houses which provide middle school information. In addition, bilingual staff and translation services are available to assist staff in communicating with the families. As mandated by Jose P., we provide professional development to the whole school staff, including teachers, paraprofessionals, administration, SBST members, etc. Our ENL Teacher provides the mandatory 7.5 hours of ENL training for general education teachers and 10 hours for Special Education teachers. Our ENL teacher works with individual classroom teachers to assist them with the instruction for ELLs. These professional developments are delivered during faculty conferences, grade conferences, after school sessions and on the Chancellor's Professional Development Days. Attendance records are recorded and logged. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL Teacher is in personal contact with the parents of ELLs. The ENL teacher, Mrs. Shaller individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners in November to discuss the goals of the program, their child's languge development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/ translator . 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Young Doplomats Magnet Academy has a strong and functional PTA that plays a pivotal role in the life of the school's community. Montly PTA and SLT meetings are held during which participants discuss important school issues. Families receive monthly multiple-page in a home-language Newsletters informing them of school-wide, every grade-level classroom and outside-of-the-classroom curriculum, events, and activities. These Newsletters are both bag packed for each student, emailed to families who have internet access, as well as displayed on the Young Diplomats Magnet Academy website. 2018-19 CEP 52  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Denise Gomez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M242 School Name: Young Diplomats Magnet Academy Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration their child at Young Diplomats Magnet Academy, PS 242M, each parent/guardian is required to fill in and sign the Home Language Information Survey. Parents/guardians for whom English is a second language are interviewed by a bilingual certified pedagogue or administrator in their native language if it is Spanish, French, Haitian Creole, or Fulani. Based upon the Home Language Form, students who speak a home language other than English are identified, the native language. An interview with a parent/guardian on the topic of preferred language communication between the school and home and on a preferred ENL program for their child is being held. In order to analyze the number of Home Language surveys, an administrator (principal) runs the RPOB report from ATS. Our school uses all methods of school-home contacts requested by the families. We use school-wide distribution list to email, call, write letters, send flyers, invitations, monthly Newsletters to communicate with our students' caregivers. 2018-19 CEP 56  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our students come to our school from all over the world and their families speak many different languages. Among them are: Spanish, Arabic, Haitian-Creole, French, Fulani, and other languages. We found that most parents prefer to communicate in English, Spanish, and French. These finding come available through personal contacts with the parents during their child's registration and at the interviews. Before scheduling parent-teacher conferences, we evaluate our data from the RPOB report and recrute our bilingual pedagogues willing to serve as interpreters. While preparing for testing, the testing coordinator analyzes the latest data from the RPOB report and makes necessary contacts with various translating services to accommodate "L" students who require transtated testing documents. The data findings of our school's demography has shown that among 199 students who are enrolled in young Diplomats Magnet Academy there are 1.3% of student population whose native language is Arabic, 1.02% of student population whose native language is Fulani, 0.6% of student population whose 2018-19 CEP 57  native language is Madeko, 3% of the student population whose native language is French, 5% of student population whose native language is Spanish, and 0.3% of student population whose native language is Wolof. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Young Diplomats Magnet Academy provides wide variety of documents that disseminates every year and require translation.Documents containing critical information that are translated include, but are not limited to, the following areas: progress reports , weekly letters, parent-teacher conference announcements, mails, weekly homework sheets, general overview of student curriculum. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to All school functions, including ELL identification process at registration, provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 58  IEP meetings that take place every other Wednesday throughout the year, parent-teacher conferences in November 2015-March 2016, Meet-the-Teacher Night, classroom and grade-level assemblies, special performances that takes place as culminations at the conclusion of various art, music, and movement special programs that are offered by the SBOs in the collaboration with our school throughout the year, an annual Thanksgiving Feast in November 2015, the Reading Gala in March 2016, an International Baccalaureate Learner Profile Showcase (in conjunction with our school's International Baccalaureate Candidacy process), monthly principal meetings with the families, called "Tea with Ms. D", winter holiday show that displays the celebration of Winter Holidays Around the World, December 2016, Cultural Art Exhibition that displays student art and Media Work February 2016, a Career Day in May 2016, use oral interpretation services according to analysis from the RPOB report. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 CEP 59   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Young Diplomats Magnet Academy provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes his/her rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Since our school offers French instruction as a foreign language, each school's facility has a sign in both English and French as per request of the majority of the parents and according to a requirement of the International Baccalaureate Organization. Our school has obtained a translation into such languages of the signage and forms required from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Needs Assessments are distributed by the Parent Coordinator and the ENL teacher. Based on the results of the surveys, we provide our parents with written translations of all school notices and at all events. There is a translation team, consisting of staff members, Parent Coordinator and parents. Types of workshops are also based on the survey results. Formal or informal recommendations of our parents are always reviewed and analyzed. We have a diverse community with diverse needs and we take it to a consideration when reaching our to partner with community-based organizations. 2018-19 CEP 60 
