2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M245 School Name: M.S. M245 THE COMPUTER SCHOOL Principal: HENRY ZYMECK 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Computer School 310300010245 6,7,8 100 West 77 th Street 917-441-1236 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 03M245 212-678-5908 Fax: Henry Zymeck hzymeck@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Henry Zymeck Diamond Skinner Eve Fogel TBD n/a n/a n/a District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street ialtschul@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave, New York, NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 646-470-0721 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Henry Zymeck Diamond Skinner Sharon Just n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Philip Friedman Erica Abramson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Member/ UFT Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Starrlyn Fikaris Daniel Doody Margaret Reilly Daphne Guarino Lindsay Melachrinos Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ UFT Staff Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1. Our Vision Statement and Expectations for Teaching and Learning sum up our overall philosophy. One feature of the Computer School (CS) experience that attests to this philosophy is our commitment to providing continuous opportunities for extending the classroom experience via numerous field trips. The Computer School—A Vision Shared 2018-19 CEP 9  There is widespread acceptance among both scholars and practitioners in the field that the defining notion and judgment of a school is what it produces. Therefore, the basic questions to be asked about The Computer School are: What do we want our students to get out of their tenure here? What are they expected to know and be able to do? What kind of people do we want them to be after their three years? These questions must be answered as an ideal. It is understood that this ideal will not likely be attained; yet it is essential that we maintain it as a vision. Here, then, is what we would like The Computer School to produce: A student who routinely and purposefully reflects upon his/her work This means that we must provide all students with the means to develop meaningful projects, the latitude to err and correct, the time to edit and revise, the atmosphere to plan and ruminate, and the support to critique and accept criticism. A student who can enter high school with a sense that school is not only a place where he/she is helped to prepare for the real world of work and self-fulfillment, but is itself part of the real world. This means that we must provide a curriculum that recognizes and is informed by the interrelationship of several disciplines, and hence rejects the artificiality of subjects in isolation. We must afford all students the opportunity to work collaboratively while allowing for different styles and speeds of learning. Further, it means that we must develop as part of the curriculum a program in which all students are exposed to theater, museums, business, government, environmental sites, and other cultural institutions and community resources. A student with a growing understanding of his/her place and significance both in today’s society and the continuum of history, who is developing a heightened sense of the interdependence of the various forces of history, and who demonstrates a healthy respect for the world’s diverse cultures…. hence, a child who reflects the understanding and responsibility that would enable him/her to see him/herself as a valued, productive, and compassionate member of society. This means that not only must we provide all students with a solid historical background but also encourage them to become active participants in their community as they also actively participate in their own education. It means that we reject the patchwork, superficially layered-on, so-called multicultural approach to the social studies in favor of one in which the world’s collective cultures are in all senses genuinely integrated. As such, the individual student becomes truly multicultural. A student who is an active learner and who develops a real spirit of inquiry; a student who is a problem solver. This means that our purpose must not be to give information or facts or answers, but to provide the means, the setting, and the tools which will enable our students to not just seek “the answer” but to search for the right questions to pose and to confidently ask these questions in a perpetual exploration. It means that we open our students to new and diverse experiences; that we provide them with opportunities to produce authentic work, germane to and stemming from their own interests. A student who is on his/her way to becoming technologically aware; one who will understand, or at least begin to comfortably utilize, the power of the computer and related technology and be able to access information and resources through a variety of electronic media such that he/she can thrive academically and vocationally in the world of the 21 st century. This means that we must provide students with an environment in which computers are readily accessible and are thoroughly integrated into all phases of school life. It means that lessons must be designed to allow for different groups of students each to be engaged in different tasks simultaneously. 2018-19 CEP 10  A well-rounded child who is able to express himself coherently and lucidly in a variety of modes. This means that while we cannot hope to be comprehensive in terms of topics covered, we must provide a full curricular range including the arts—as well as the sciences and humanities—which are not presented in some enrichment fashion, but rather are seen in a fully integrated sense as part of a complete education. Further, it means that writing must be a part of all subject areas. It also means that opportunities in sports must be offered to all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Over the course of a school year, our students participate in a number of experiential enhancements to the standard curriculum. These include enhancements within the classroom, such as partnerships between our ELA teachers and teaching artists, an in-house hydrofarm and a varied enrichment program; and experiences outside the school building, such as visits to museums and cultural institutions, theater, music and dance performances at Lincoln Center and elsewhere, an excursion to Ellis Island, day trips to the Constitution Center in Philadelphia, overnight team-building trips to Frost Valley (6th) Camp Mason (7th) and Ramapo for Children (8th), team-building field days in Central Park and Van Cortlandt Park, a movie-going experience for Spanish, visits to houses of worship as part of our world religions unit, and a Greek Olympics simulation. We add new features every year to enhance the CS experience such as Science-Technology-Engineering-Arts-Science (STEAM) classes and STARS (Students Taslking About Real Stuff) weekly workshops. We also emphasize community building in all of our school structures, with students having many opportunities to get to know each other within and across grades during their 3-year CS experience. Students in 6th and 7th grades are in multiple groupings each day. For example, in ELA, SS, Art and STEAM, classes meet in mixed 6th and 7th grade groupings with reduced class size. In Math, Science, PE and Spanish, students are in single-graded groupings. The hallmark of our community-building events is our monthly All School Meetings (ASM) where students modeling CS academic and community values are celebrated and students engage in role-playing and performances centered around school spirit and positive approaches to middle school academic/social/emotional challenges. We also have many community-building events throughout the 3-year experience, most notablysuch as family barbeques (BBQ’s), thematic-based feasts, a talent show, academic competitions, award ceremonies, student government, student-of-the-month recognition, and academic fairs. Expectations for Teaching and Learning at CS In alignment with our school’s vision, the following eight elements represent what we aspire to in defining the CS educational experience for students in all subject areas. The planning, execution, and assessment of lessons, units and extensions should be grounded in these essential expectations. Student-centered instruction: Lessons and units are thoughtfully planned so that students are spending the bulk of instructional time actively engaged in problem solving, assessing, and employing higher-order thinking skills. Direct instruction is used sparingly to develop students’ procedural literacy. Alignment with Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS): Students are engaged in learning activities that encourage explaining, defending, reflecting, hypothesizing, and critiquing through speaking and writing. All students are expected to accomplish rigorous learning outcomes, such as those set forth in the CCLS. Cooperative learning : Students work cooperatively in pairs or groups, and have both individual and mutual accountability in the group setting. Students are given frequent opportunities to assess and challenge each others' strategic thinking. 2018-19 CEP 11  Differentiation : Learning activities and student groupings are tailored to accommodate individual learning differences (including Individualized Education Plan (IEP)/504 accommodations) so that each student is continuously and appropriately engaged, challenged and supported. Continuous formative assessment: In addition to pre-assessment and post-assessment, students are continually assessed on an individual level while engaged in learning tasks. Students regularly engage in self-assessment and peer-assessment. Assessments are based on indicators that are clearly articulated in rubrics. Ongoing assessment informs subsequent instructional decisions. Effective communication of progress: Students and parents are provided with up-to-date feedback so that they can monitor progress and make adjustments as necessary. Students continually articulate their progress in accurate and meaningful ways. Experiential learning: Students are encouraged to make connections across disciplines and to explore the world beyond the school via curriculum-enhancing field experiences, guest speakers, professional collaborations, partnerships with cultural institutions, and technology resources. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Nearly 20% of students at the Computer School have SE/related services mandated by an IEP. Most of these students receive ICT services, typically for around 60% of their academic program. The school has a 12:1 class. One of the students has limited mobility. The school also serves around 10 students with ELL designation. About half of these are at the "commanding" level and only receive services due to mandates. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made significant progress in the elements of Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family Community ties. Our key areas of focus for this school year are the elements of Effective School Leadership and Collaborative Teachers. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M245 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 400 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 24 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 11 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 27.0% % Attendance Rate 26.0% % Reduced Lunch 2.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 27.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 47.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.08 4% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 84.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 36 96.2% 1.3% 19.2% 12.0% 8.0% 4.7% 2 44% 3.5 67.4% 85% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The Computer School has in place a dynamic and progressive approach to curriculum, teaching and learning. Teachers collaborate to design units, lessons, activities and assessments that promote attainment of higher-order thinking skills. Student progress is monitored and students are held individually accountable for learning via an extensive standards-based grading framework. These structures are listed as strengths in various data sources, including PPO data, ADVANCE data, and School environment surveys. 2. The Computer School is proud of its longstanding commitment to and record of accomplishment in targeting and meeting individual student needs within a diverse community of learners. However, current changes in district-wide and citywide admissions policies require us to examine our capacity to differentiate instruction, which is consistent with the District's priorities for the 2018-2019 school year. In looking for a particular area to prioritize, we noticed that last year's 6th grade NYS test data test data indicates that gains in ELA for our lowest third in the 6th grade outpaced gains in Math. For example, in ELA, the lowest third sixth graders made an average improvement of 0.65 of a level to a mean proficiency of 2.99; in Math, the average gain was 0.21 to a mean proficiency level of 2.56. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have implemented a system of supports to better identify and track the progress of struggling learners in math, and will have implemented differentiation strategies intended to target and address individual needs. This will result in in our lowest third subgroup of sixth grade students attaining an average proficiency gain of 0.40 compared to their previous year's results on the NYS Common Core Math exam. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement Sustained Sllent Reading time for all 6th grade students with more structure aimed at differentiation and assessment of independent reading. Use common assessment data to monitor progress in ELA and Math Enhance goal-setting, -questioning, differentiation and assessment practices that focus on specific high-leverage skill areas via targeted PD. Develop common assessments for each subject 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All 6th grade students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Rebecca Rotelli All students November 2018, February 2019, June 2019 ELA and Math staff, testing coordinator, administration All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Nicole Chu All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teaching staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All staff will provide syllabi for students and families which contain information on how to support students at home. PA-sponsored parent engagement meetings will have guest speakers who focus on specific ways to support academic, social and emotional development. We will engage parents via Jupiter Grades so that they can have continual access to student progress and performance data. Both teacher-led and student-led PT conferences will articulate student-specific information, and help students develop increasing ownership over the process. Parent engagement will be tracked via conference sign-up system and parents not attending will be targeted for outreach efforts by parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use technical resources such as STAR and Freckle assessment programs to assess and monitor skill development. Purchase text resources and print resources to facilitate curriculum development. Use Extended time meetings to engage in PD based around goal-setting and questioning techniques. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 15  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, common assessments will be administered indicating a 7% increase from earlier common assessment data for the target group. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math departmental common assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Computer School is highly regarded for its supportive school environment, particularly when it comes to promoting positive behaviors between students. However, both DOE and internal survey results indicate that there are aspects of school culture that would benefit from additional support structures. Specifically, in the Supportive Environment category, the school received only a 65% positive response to questions about Personal Attention and Support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school will supplement the social-emotional and organizational support structures already in place with additional initiatives, including a weekly workshop for sixth graders called STARS (Students Talking About Real Stuff), resulting in an increase of 5% to an average of 70% positive scores on the five Personal Attention and Support questions from the DOE student surveys. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Lagging Skills Response System will be re-visited and aligned with AIS best practices ASM leadership framework will be revised to allow for more student input and leadership. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Katie Furr October 2018-June 2019 Students who are having academic, social or emotional issues All students Monthly Nicole Chu from September 2018-June 2019 Mindful Mondays will be implemented All students Weekly from December 2018-June 2019 Nicole Chu, Jessica Shalom School counselor will collaborate with AP to have counseling time re-purposed to address specific student needs All students September 2018-June 2019 Erin Hill, Jessica Shalom 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PA-sponsored workshops on social-emotional supports and practices; Parent Coordinator led workshops dissemination of resources; Student-specific outreach during weekly contact time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session and PA funding for teacher leaders to create supports and attend PD; PD time for Supportive and Inclusive Learning Environments modules; Respect For All training; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, internal survey aligned to Personal Attention and Support questions on DOE survey will be administered to students and will result in over 70% positive responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will examine progress made towards the reduction of incidents in February 2019 and determine if adjustments are required to the action plan at that time. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the years, our school has made teacher collaboration a priority. In the ELA department, for example, teachers have worked closely together and with colleagues from other disciplines to implement literacy standards and rubrics across the curricular spectrum. This has resulted in an upward trend in ELA progress as measured by NYS common core exams. Last year we were successful in initiating an interdisciplinary collaboration between math and science in a way that similarly supports both math and science skill development. Other elements were introduced, including a structured inter-visitation framework that allowed for teacher choice, and a more inclusive approach to determining PD options for teachers. However, even though the score for Collaborative teachers was higher than both the D3 and Citywide averages, it dropped for the second straight year. This suggest that further initiatives are needed to strengthen teacher collaboration as a way to support student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each department will collaboratively develop a common assessment mechanism to monitor student progress across classes and demographic groups, and will use assessment information to inform instructional decisions, resulting in a framework element score of 4.3 in the Collaborative Teachers element of the 2018-19 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Appoint a Department Team Leaders with expectations for meetings All teachers June 2018-August 2018 Assistant principal Select and purchase online instructional support programs as part of department-wide common assessment practice All teachers October Conduct weekly team meetings and initiate the creation of common assessments Team leader and teachers Administer common assessments to students and score the assessments; put score data in a school-wide database Teaching staff Implement Data Days (one for each department in each MP) where teachers can process data from common assessments and determine the implications for planning, instruction and assessment Teaching staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, AP and DTLs Principal and AP Principal, AP and DTL Principal, AP and DTL 2018-June 2019 September 2018-October 2018 November 2018-June 2019 November 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Feedback regarding the common assessment framework will solicited during SLT and PA exec board meetings and will be the subject of PA general meeting presentation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds for PD, STAR assessments, Freckle online math support and tracking framework; Per Diem subs for enabling participation of teachers during Data Days Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 21  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each department will have entered assessment data into a shared database and will be able to articulate specific instances of modifying instructional strategies based on the data and how it has impacted target students and groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Freckle math skill tracking system, STAR ELA data reports, SS essay skill tracking Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has employed a shared leadership model over the years, resulting in a high degree of ownership by teachers in various aspects of school leadership. However, DOE school environment surveys as well as internal surveys indicate that there is room for growth in the realm of leadership practices. Most notably, scores on specific DOE survey questions re: principal's leadership practice indicated areas for development. For example, only 40% of teachers agreed that the principal participated in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will increase presence and engagement in departmental team meetings, and participate with departmental teams during departmental Data Days, resulting in an increase of 0.5 points in the Framework Elements and Survey Elements score on the Instructional Leadership section of the 2018-19 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Communicate school-wide expectations for planning and debriefing Departmental Team Meetings to team leaders All staff Principal, AP and DTLs September 2018 to October 2018 Principal and AP will rotate through departmental meetings and participate as necessary Principal will participate in Data Days, where results of departmental assessments are analyzed for actionable feedback Principal and AP will meet separately with DLTs to adjust strategies during the year as more information becomes available All teachers October 2018-June 2019 All teachers November 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP and DLTs September 2018-June 2019 Administration and DTLs Administrators and DTLs Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent representatives will be kept informed during SLT and PA general meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teacher-leaders, PA and funding as needed from PA and tax-levy sources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 teacher-leaders will have initiated a series of professional learning activities, resulting in a rate of 70% positive responses on a mid-year PD survey with questions similar to instructional leadership section of Framework for Great Schools survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year PD survey and Advance rating report on component 4e growing and developing as a professional Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has a high degree of parent engagement as measured by participation in school-wide events and PT conferences. However, we need to continue to reach out to parents to improve participation rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, targeted outreach by administration, parent coordinator and parent leadership will result in a 20% increase in parent attendance at non-PT conference events at school, as measured by attendance totals on sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Adding morning scheduled conference time and PA general meetings for parents who have difficulty with scheduling times later in the day Parents with time conflicts Implement a Listening Conferences framework targeting 6th grade parents during parent contact time, including conferences that accommodate language barriers and flexible formats (e.g. call in, facetime) 6th grade parents Add more parent events to build community, such as grade-level parent breakfasts All teachers and students Administration and Parent Coordinator Administration and Parent Coordinator All staff October 2018- June 2019 October 2018-November 2018 January 2019 to March 2019 Have culminating performances for grade-wide arts classed, such as Ballroom Basix and American Composers Orchestra All teachers and students May 2019 to June 2019 All staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CS website, Jupiter Grades messaging, and Parent Coordinator outreach will be used to encourage active participation in all school-wide events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax-levy funding for per session as needed, PA funding to supplement outreach efforts and to fund special events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  By January 2019, more than 70% of 6th grade parents will have participated in Listening Conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PCAR data and outreach logs will be monitored on a monthly basis Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are not receiving services via IEP but are not approaching learning targets, as indicated by level 1 or low level 2 performance on Jupiter Grades. Students who are not receiving services via IEP but are not approaching learning targets, as indicated by level 1 or low level 2 performance on Jupiter Grades. Students who are not receiving services via IEP but are not approaching learning targets, as indicated by level 1 or low level 2 performance on Jupiter Grades. Students who are not receiving services via IEP but are not approaching learning targets, as indicated by level 1 or low level 2 performance on Jupiter Grades. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Participation in academic support classes with targeted literacy support. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small-group and one-to-one, depending on need. Either at-risk SETSS during the school day or after school. Participation in academic support classes with targeted math support Small-group and one-to-one, depending on need. Either at-risk SETSS during the school day or after school. Participation in academic support classes with targeted science support Small-group and one-to-one, depending on need. Either at-risk SETSS during the school day or after school. Participation in academic support classes with targeted social studies support Small-group and one-to-one, depending on need. Either at-risk SETSS during the school day or after school. 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are having difficulties pertaining to normal social or emotional development. Participation in at-risk counseling and targeted emotional support Small-group and one-to-one, depending on need. Either at-risk SETSS during the school day or after school. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). According to the RHST report from 11/2/18, we have a total of 13 students in temporary housing. 12 are code D (doubled up.) and 1 2018-19 CEP 31 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Before September, our parent coordinator will reach out to individual families with STH and identify family needs on an individualized basis. She will then coordinate with Principal and AP to determine how to best address those needs, including how to best use funding set aside for this purpose. is coded S (shelter.) 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $6398 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 03M245 The Computer School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 03M245 The Computer School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 03M245 The Computer School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 38  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 40  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Computer School Borough Manhattan School Number 245 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Henry Zymeck Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marsha Noble Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Jessica Shalom Coach School Counselor Erin Hill Parent Parent Coordinator Sara Sloves Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 408 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.72% 2018-19 CEP 43  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We will be administering the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) test to all our students at the beginning, middle and end of the year to determine their reading ability. To learn their writing abilities we have them write about a topic and then use a rubic that is aligned with the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. We also give them teacher assessments to determine their listening skills. They are given numerous opportunities for us to evaluate their speaking abilities. We also use the NYSITELLand NYSESLAT to learn how our ELLs are doing in listening, reading, speaking and writing. We use the results of the all these assessments to create lessons that promote content and language acquisition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher and the core content area teachers meet regularly to ensure optimal delivery of instruction based on the result of these assessments. 2018-19 CEP 44  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The student's core content area teachers and the ENL teacher meet on a regular basis to discuss and review the student's work. If a student is not making AYP, a committee comprised of the ENL and core content teachers is set up to review the student's work and make recommendations for support services. Small group and individual instruction may be provided. The student may be placed in the Wilson reading program. Several weeks later, the committee reconvenes to discuss the student's progress. If the ELL has not make adequate progress in his academic and language development, new measures ae implemented. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We will be having enrichment classes during the school day which provide at-risk ELLs with small group and individualized instruction. Some of our SWD-ELLs' IEPs mandate Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS). 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ELL is constantly assessed to make sure that he is on grade level in his core content subjects. If he is not, a committee which consists of the ENL teacher, the content area teacher and any service providers that are seeing the student. In accordance with the Response To Intervention (RTI) framework a plan is implemented to ensure that the ELL receives high-quality, differentiated small group or individualized instruction to meet his academic and linguistic needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We analyze each ELLs scores on the four modalities that the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT test.We obtain these scores from the RLAT function on ATS. We use the analysis to help us create rigorous and meaningful instruction that meets the academic and linguistic needs of our ELLs. The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is a fantastic tool for identifying prospective strategies for working with ELL subgroups. Unfortunately, since our ELL population is only seven students across two grade levels EDAT does not work for us. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The results of these tests are given to all teachers of ELLs. If the teacher shave any question about the results, the ENL teacher is available to help them interpret the data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are serviced according to the required number of minutes and program models set forth in CR Part 154.2. Our entering and emerging ELL students receives half of her mandated 360 minutes of ENL instruction in a stand-alone program and half in an integrated program. Our transitioning students receive 50%of their instruction using the stand-alone method and 50%using the integrated method.The students at the expanding level of English proficiency receive all their 180 minutes of ENL services using the integrated model. For two years after the ELL exits ELL status, they receive 90 minutes of instruction per week. In the integrated model the EnL teacher and the content area teacher co-teach. The ENL teacher and the content area teacher collaborate to make sure that the ELLs are learning academic content and at the same time are developing their English literacy skills. The students are placed in math 2018-19 CEP 45  and Spanish classes according to ability. The rest of the classes are heterogeneous. Sixth graders join seventh graders for science, social studies, English language arts, STEAM and art. There are four heterogeneous eighth grade classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All the ELLs receive the mandated amount of minutes. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction using th using the integrated model of instruction. Our transitioning students receives 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week . Half of the instruction is in an integrated classroom and half is in a stand-alone ENL classroom. Our students scoring at the entering and emerging level of English competency receives 360 minutes of ENL instruction a week. The model for this program is fifty percent integrated and fifty percent stand-alone. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instruction is in English. and is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Various instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible and to foster language development . Ascertaining prior knowledge and developing vocabulary are core components of our program that enable our ELLs to understand content. Realia, pictures, videos, graphs, charts, globes, maps, graphic organizers, dictionaries and thesauruses all help the students comprehend content. The ELLs use computers to do research. They use math and science materials..The ENL teacher and the content area teacher model all activities that the ELLs are asked to perform. There are many hands-on activities that help make content comprehensible. Group work enables the ELLs in the integrated program to learn with and from fluent English speakers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We only teach English. We have no means to evaluate ELLs in their home languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We would differentiate instruction for SIFE students if we had any. We would first test them to ascertain their academic strengths and weaknesses in order to learn their educational needs. For newcomers, thosewho are here for up to three years and are at the entering and emerging levels of English proficiency we support them by using many pictures, realia and videos to help them learn core content. Whenever possible, we rewrite text or obtain text with the same content but with easier vocabulary. Before reading the text or learning a new concept, prior knowledge is elicited and key vocabulary is taught. The teacher does a guided reading with these students. In order to assess their learnings, they fill in answers to comprehension questions using a word or a phrase. These answers demonstrate if the student understood the text and concepts .Developing students are students who have been ELLs for four to six years. They and long term ELLs, who have been ELLs for seven years or more, need less supports than newcomers. However, prior knowledge is also elicited and more difficult new vocabulary is introduced. Students read the text independently and write detailed answers to questions about the text. Long term and former ELLS are expected to submit well-organized essays where they cite and can explain primary and secondary sources. Developing ELLs are expected to start approaching the ability to create well-organized essays with clear explanations. All students engage in classroom discussions, debates and dramatizations to enable them to develop their 2018-19 CEP 46  speaking and listening skills. We provide a safe classroom environment so that even newcomers feel comfortable expressing themselves. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use modeling, scaffolding, accessing prior knowledge, introducing vocabulary, summarizing and questioning. Visuals, charts, videos, realia, math and science materials, and art supplies help our ELL-SWDs learn content and develop language proficiency that is aligned with the NYS Common Core Curriculum. The ELLs read fiction and nonficton texts. They read primary and secondary sources. They use computers to do research. They engage in discussions, debates and dramatizations to help understand academic concepts and accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are programmed so that they can receive their mandated services without disrupting their normal academic routines. Any pull-out services are delivered during elective Spanish or art classes, or during non-instructional time. English language development is supported for all learners in all subject areas via school-wide literacy rubrics aligned with CCLS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs that need additional help with math use the IXL computer math program. During our enrichment periods students wo are at-risk in a core subject will receive individual or small group instruction. All instruction is in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As yet, we have not decided on any new programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELLs participate in all school programs. They go on all school trips including sleepovers. They participate in the talent show and plays. They join after school clubs and sport teams:. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The students use academic software, online resources, dictionaries, thesauruses, science and math materials, art supplies, fiction and nonfiction books, vocabulary book, primary and secondary sources, globes and maps. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Teachers use knowledge of ELLs' culture and home language to inform instructional planning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs are in age appropriate classes. Sixth and seventh graders attend all classes except math, Spanish and physical education together. Half the class is comprised of students in each grade. Math, Spanish and physical education classes are by grade. The eighth graders have all their subjects with other eighth graders. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do share our building with two other schools. This fact does not cause any negative effect for our ELLs. We have worked cooperatively with the other schools to ensure that each school has equal access to the gym, auditorium, lunchroom and schoolyard. Ingress and dismissal are staggered. Thereby preventing any crowding on the stairs. 2018-19 CEP 47  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not have any activities for newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Students who enroll during the school year are given a student buddy; if possible the buddy speaks the ELL's home language. The social worker and parent coordinator introduce themselves to the new arrival. They inform the student that they are available if any questions and/or problems arise. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish to all our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ALL ELL personnel which includes the ENL teacher and the ELLs' content area teachers and service providers continue to learn how best to address the academic, language and social needs of our ELLs by attending workshops. The DOE through the Office of English Language Learners and Support Staff provides workshops for teachers of ELLs. Some of the workshops are given during the school day and others are online and offer P credit. In addition to courses that are taken outside of our building, we provide workshops during our professional development mandated meetings. Some of the topics we cover are the four stages of language development and what to expect the student to be able to do at each stage, and how to recognize the level of abiitity in both Basic Interpersonal Communicative skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor helps the ELLs choose schools that will provide rigorous academic instruction and English language development. Social workers research and then can recommend high schools where our ELLs will feel comfortable and where they will make progress academically, linguisitically and socially. The students are allowed to visit the high schools during school time. PD occurs during extended day PD time. Records are kept by AP for these meetings. 2018-19 CEP 48  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We email or call the parents to set up a time to schedule the meeting. We ask if they would like an interpreter. If they want one, we arrange it through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator, Ms. Sloves provides many activities for the parents of ELLs to get involved in the school. She encourages them to join the Parent Association. Twice a month she meets with parents over coffee to discuss whatever they want. She coordinates after school activities such as a family barbecue. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 49 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Henry Zymeck, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Henry Zymeck Title Principal Jessica Shalom Assistant Principal Sara Sloves Parent Coordinator Marsha Noble ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 51  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M245 School Name: The Comuter School Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize data available in ATS and in the permanent record folders of incoming students to determine the primary language spoken by parents. Data is collected from sources such as Home Language Identification Survey and Blue Emergency Contact Cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish, Mandarin Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 52  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. parent newsletters, report cards, announce,ents 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences, curriculum nights, community events interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent involvement will be monitored to ensure that requirements set forth in CR A-663 are met for all non-English speaking parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys to gather feedback. 2018-19 CEP 54 
