2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M255 School Name: M.S. 255 SALK SCHOOL OF SCIENCE Principal: RHONDA PERRY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Salk School of Science 02M255 School Number (DBN): 310200010255 6-8 319 E 19th Street, New York, NY 10003 212-614-8745 Phone Number: 212-614-0095 Fax: Rhonda Perry Rperry3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rhonda Perry Email Address: Jake Wizner and Jessica Furlong Rose Franco, SusiNichol, Megan Kelly Rhonda Perry N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue room 713, NY, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov 212-356-3739 212-356-7514 Phone Number: Manhattan, District 2 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  333 7 th Avenue , 8 th floor, NY, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rhonda Perry Jake Wizner SusiNichol Jennifer Goodwin Jacqulyn Rivas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/teacher Member/ CSA Member/ teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Courtney Allison-Horowitz Member/ parent Maud Maron LalehAlemzadeh Marcel Pezet MaybellBreton Rachelle Sorenson Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/teacher Member/ teacher Member/ parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Salk School’s mission is to tap young people’s natural curiosity and to engage them in learning that is personally meaningful, socially responsible and academically rigorous. Our goal is to help students develop the habits of mind of 2018-19 CEP 9  various experts and become lifelong learners who are reflective, creative and independent thinkers. Committed to excellence and equity, we seek to prepare all students for the challenges of the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Salk School is one of a handful of collaborative schools started in 1995. Salk has a strong collegial culture of learners where teachers focus on fostering a love of learning in children and work closely with families to nurture students’ voices. We want students to graduate with a passion for ideas and to believe in themselves and their power to make the world better. Our academics-- with an enriched science education program that emphasizes inquiry and writing --is rigorous and engaging. We work with professionals in the field of science and take advantage of numerous cultural institutions in New York City in order to empower students with the knowledge and practice to behave and think like scientists. Students leave Salk understanding that science is a way of making sense of the natural world through observation, experimentation, and an open and critical exchange of ideas. In other subject areas our goal is the same-- to help students develop the habits of mind of professionals in various disciplines. All students study math, science, literature, social studies, foreign language, physical education, technology, drama, and art. There is a strong emphasis on literacy across the curriculum. Our learning community is small, safe, nurturing and student-centered. We are committed to creating an environment where students are: dedicated to learning, open-minded, open-hearted, true to themselves, responsible to the community, and active in improving the world. All of our professionals are committed to being a part of young people’s lives in order to help them develop a strong sense of self. We have a family-friendly environment, and we welcome experts in various fields to share their experiences with our students. Partnerships and Special Distinctions  We have a unique partnership with a medical school (the NYU School of Medicine--NYUSOM). Faculty and students at the medical school work with Salk’s science staff to enhance various units in science and to co-teach an 8 th grade health class. Thirty students from the NYUSOM also mentor Salk students who are identified as at-risk after school. In addition to co-teaching with our science and physical education staff, we hold a career fair in May where faculty from the NYUSOM share their career paths and highlights of their workday with parents and students. At the end of each year at Salk, students in each grade exhibit a major science project during our grade-wide science fair (Exploratorium) demonstrating their acquisition of scientific habits of mind and literacy. Student exhibitions are evaluated by faculty, administration, parents and NYUSOM faculty and students.  We have been selected as an Urban Advantage demonstration site for our outstanding work in science. We now work closely with 8 major cultural institutions, including the American Museum of Natural History. Teachers work closely with educators from these cultural institutions to design curriculum, lessons, and experiences for students that will enhance learning. Teachers organize frequent trips to these cultural institutions. Student experiences and work are documented so that we can share best practice during PD sessions with educators throughout NYC. We have an Urban Advantage liaison (one of science teachers) who coordinates experiences for the entire department with these 2018-19 CEP 10  cultural institutions and assures that the end of year projects that we require are aligned to Urban Advantage standards (field work, controlled experiment, design projects, secondary research).  After years of building our after-school program, we have now partnered with Manhattan Youth through the mayor’s middle school initiative. Offerings include drawing and painting, forensics, robotics, math club, chess, guitar, Student Council, team sports (Tennis, Track and Field, soccer, Basketball, Volleyball), intramural sports (soccer, football, basketball, floor hockey and wiffle ball), Drama, homework help, and more funded through the Mayor’s after-school initiative.  In 2005 and 2011, we were awarded best Middle School in the city by BlackBoard Media Awards and have received several distinctions for our performance in math and science as well as our reading program and after-school program. Unique School Features: Creative Scheduling  The school is organized in grade teams and departments. Schedules are designed by teachers so that teachers have common planning time by grade, by department and with ICT partners during the school day  Classes at Salk are an hour or more in length. We have been able to have long blocks of time (2 hours or more) for Humanities classes and 1 ½ hours for science labs.  We have an advisory curriculum that was designed by teachers to meet the needs of our adolescent learners. Each grade has an advisory that is tailor-made to fit the needs of the students in that particular grade. We have crafted a list of Salk School values that serve to focus and organize the advisory curriculum. Each year, we re-visit the curriculum and tweak it based on student and teacher feedback.  We have a rich elective program that allows students to select from an array of interesting classes offered by teachers and teaching-artist. Students from any grade can choose a particular elective thus allowing for cross-grade interaction.  In addition to math, Humanities and physical education, students have integrated science as well as science research and writing, coding, Spanish, drama and visual arts. The goal is to help students develop the habits of mind of scientists and develop their research and writing skills. We additionally want to ensure that all students have access to and are able to use technology as a tool for learning and have strong public speaking skills to do the rigorous work in science and other areas that we require. Nearly all of our 8th graders take the math regents. 2018-19 CEP 11  High Quality Professional Development  Each year, our professional development team selects a focus of study based on various assessments. Our PD committee meets twice monthly to plan faculty agendas and evaluate the PD experience.  Faculty members attend numerous workshops throughout the country and city which they later turn-key for their colleagues at department meetings and faculty meetings. Staff members additionally attend workshops given at Teachers College, through the DOE, and within our Network.  We participate in the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) and consequently attend many PD sessions there and work closely with a TC staff developer in humanities and science to improve our practice. We also have a math coach from Metamorphosis who works to support all math teachers. All of our science teachers are Lead teachers with the Urban Advantage program  Teams and departments meet for long periods of time at the end of the school year to assess curriculum maps and units and plan for the upcoming school year.  We have a faculty book club that meets monthly after school to discuss selected books. School Culture and Core Values  Our culture revolves around a set of core values: to have a passion for learning, to be open-minded, to be open-hearted, to be true to yourself, to be responsible to your community, and to take action to improve the world around you.  We are a community of learners. All teachers read and review young adult books over the summer, and post reviews for students to read. Teachers meet in a monthly book club. Teachers visit eachother's classrooms to share best practices and work with staff developers from various organizations. Teachers regularly present at conferences around the country. 2018-19 CEP 12   Our community is open-hearted and open-minded. We have a thriving Student Council and GSA (Gender Sexuality Alliance ). This year, students organized a drive to donate supplies to hurricane victims in Puerto Rico. Our curriculum is built around understanding multiple perspectives and developing empathy.  Students exhibit dedication to the community beyond the classroom by volunteering in large numbers to serve as tour guides, participate in student council, do community service at various organizations, and serve as "big buddies" to incoming 6th graders.  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One of our goals as a school is to move children with special needs into less-restrictive environments by the end of 8 th grade. We do this by mainstreaming children in integrated collaborative teaching settings, doing formative assessment to inform small group instruction, and by providing a lot of support from co-teachers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Growth: We made the most progress in the following areas: rigorous instruction--teachers improved in their practice in terms of giving next step feedback, creating small learning groups, and data analysis work (math and science department). supportive environment--there were more Student Council activities and big buddy programs to foster school-wide student collaboration and rapport. We also have a thriving GSA. collaborative teachers--all teachers engaged in work to revamp two units to incorporate more digital and global technologies, and to better align assessments to goals. Teachers also participated in Professional Learning 2018-19 CEP 13  Communities that created stronger vertical and horizontal alignment of the curriculum and deepened their practice around differentiation by doing case studies of various learners. Strong family-community ties--teachers on various teams created systems to facilitate parent/teacher communication and the PA worked to further involve parents in events by using survey data to inform outreach. effective leadership--together with a group of parents and teachers, the administration laid out a STEM vision for the school and acted on this to increase technology purchases, STEM teacher training, coding lessons for students and the creation of mini-makers lab. We have also worked to increase community education around cyber safety and anxiety in teens. Key Area of Focus: We will continue to support teachers in unit planning in order to ensure vertical and horizontal alignment of the curriculum and more rigorous assessments that match the goals of the units. We will continue to support teachers with STEM integration across the curriculum and with deepening work on data analysis in science and math and rigorous analysis of informational text and informational writing as well as independent reading. We will continue to work on tracking data, using the data to inform small group instruction and providing rich feedback to students. We will continue to support the PA to further increase parent participation at events. We will continue to develop our academic supports and inclusive school practices so that all students feel valued and supported. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M255 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 386 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 11.0% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch 9.8% % Students with Disabilities 0.5% Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 11.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 61.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.27 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 93.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 97.2% 0.8% 16.6% 1.8% 16.6% 8.8% 2 27% 11.6 88.9% 97% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on teacher feedback from our internal pd survey, our quality review feedback and the Framework for Great Schools Report-- Our school strengths: We are a strong community of learners. ● Our teachers meet by grade teams, in departments and in Professional Learning communities to think deeply about teaching and learning issues. ● We have made significant gains in Math and ELA with the lowest third of our population and with special needs students. Overall, our student scores are high in ELA and math across grade levels. ● All teachers feel responsible for addressing the standards in the Common Core and have subsequently included more informational writing, persuasive writing/argument based writing using evidence into their curriculum, more reading of informational text, and more close reading and critical thinking using texts ● Teachers are also requiring more on-demand writing . ● All of our units are common core aligned and address UDL using Wiggins’ work. ● Math and science teachers continue to work with a staff developer and continue to align our math and science curriculum with the common core/NGSS and to look at the vertical alignment of the curriculum through the lens of student conceptual, developmental and procedural knowledge in each grade in order to shore up student foundational experiences. They have also engaged in professional development to improve student work with statistics and data analysis. ● We work with Teachers College for pd and have a staff developer. We will continue to work with our staff developer on differentiating independent reading in Humanities. 2018-19 CEP 16  ● All science teachers are lead teachers with Urban Advantage and the organization is doing more professional development (pd) to support reading and writing in science. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will use the UDL framework and the neuro-developmental constructs from All Kinds of MInds (AKM) to strengthen two units so that they better provide access to all learners. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will meet in teaching teams to update two units using UDL and AKM to better differentiate instruction for all learners including SWDs and ELLs. All teachers September-June The principal and AP will oversee these sessions along with the pd committee. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, Family STEM Night, curriculum showcases, workshops on the standards, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Family Engagement Time, report cards providing descriptions of curriculum, and newsletters. All teachers and administration September- June The principal and parent coordinator will oversee. Curriculum Night-Sep STEM night - Oct, Curriculum Showcases- multiple dates throughout the year, Tuesdays-each week all year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, Family STEM Night, curriculum showcases, workshops on Common Core assessments, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Family 2018-19 CEP 18  Engagement Time, report cards providing descriptions of curriculum, and monthly team newsletters. the principal and the parent coordinator will oversee all implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Books on All Kinds of Minds for teachers  UDL framework    Time after school to meet by department and by grade team  Funds to pay staff developers (Metamorphosis, Teachers College) Funds to pay subs for small teacher learning groups Lunch time session for pd committee to meet Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrator tracking chart will indicate teacher completion of at least one new unit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administrator designed tracking chart Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our NYC School survey results and student feedback during student council meetings, students say most students at the school treat each other with respect. Our school’s strengths: Advisory program ● Collaborative classrooms ● Student Council ● Big Buddy Program ● Warm, nurturing school-wide environment ● Strong after school program through the Mayor’s initiative ● Teachers who understand adolescent development Long blocks of time for classes Most assessments are project-based Electives program that is multi-age and interest-based Student Council has created a Gender and Sexuality Alliance (GSA) to further make our community a welcoming space for all students. Three of our students participated in the District Student Leadership Council. Priority needs: We will work to strengthen the academic interventions that we provide to all learners, especially students with disabilities and ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students (by 5% on the NYC student survey) who feel like their teachers are providing adequate academic interventions. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will continue to strengthen their classroom systems for tracking student progress to inform their instruction and identify targeted groups for small group instruction to better support students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. Teachers will also use this information for provide relevant timely feedback to students and other appropriate supports. All students, including current and former ELLs and SWDs Start Date: Sept-June Special Education teachers will track student progress towards meeting IEP goals. SWDs Sept-June Math and ELA teachers will use i-ready diagnostics 2-3 times per year and work with a staff developer (from Metamorphosis and TC) to increase and better support small group instruction and conferring in the classroom. Start Date: Sept-June All students, including current and former ELLs and SWDs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement The principal will oversee the activity and All teachers will implement it. The AP will oversee the activity and all special education teachers will implement it. The AP will oversee the activity and all math and ELA teachers will implement it How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, curriculum showcases, sharing information via Google classrooms and monthly team newsletters. We will send out quarterly report cards to inform students and parents about academic progress and mid-quarter letters of concern to families additionally. We will also provide time on Tuesdays for families to meet with teacher teams to address concerns. All teachers will implement these initiatives. The school principal and the assistant principal will oversee implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22  Staff developers   Partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project I-ready diagnostics   Google classrooms  The Borough Field Support Center Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will survey students using questions from the citywide student survey to measure progress in this area. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. an internal survey using questions from the citywide student survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Quality Review 2015 revealed that we have a strong collaborative teacher culture. However, we continue to seek ways to strengthen this so that it translates into improvement in terms of our practice and in terms of student growth. School strengths: ● School is organized into grade teams, departments and professional learning communities ● Our professional development committee (consisting of department chairs) meets with school leaders monthly to discuss and design professional development ● Schedule allows for common planning time ● Teachers of non-core classes push in to work with core teachers ● Cross curricular planning with art, drama, technology and the core subject areas ● Grant from our principal for a day to attend national conferences with departmental and team colleagues ● Focused pd sessions ● Culture of learners ● Staff development and staff developers provided in ELA, Science and Math ● Several staff get-togethers and opportunities to celebrate our work and each other (ex: staff book club) Priority Need: Organize teachers and support their professional learning as they conduct inter-visitations to study a learner-centered element of their practice that will ensure high levels of learning for all students and greater alignment of the curriculum horizontally and vertically Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all of our teachers will have engaged in two inter-visitations and reflections in their departments. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Faculty will use an in-house inter-visitation protocol based on "Collaborative Learning Through Peer Inter-visitation: A Toolkit for Educators" to engage in small group cycles of inter-visitations and reflections. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September through June Principal and PD committee will oversee all teachers will implement 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, Family STEM Night, curriculum showcases, workshops on Common Core assessments, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Family Engagement Time, report cards providing descriptions of curriculum, and monthly team newsletters. We will also use Google classroom as a community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional resources include several books on protocols including "Collaborative Learning Through Peer Inter-visitations: A Toolkit for Educators" and Educational Leadership magazine. We will use pd meetings afterschool and our pd committee planning sessions 1x/month at lunch to work on these initiatives. All teachers will participate and implement these initivatives and the principal and the assistant principal will oversee them. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will complete one inter-visitation and reflection cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrator created inter-visitation tracking sheet and department agendas and minutes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Salk School is a middle school with a strong collegial culture of learners where teachers focus on fostering a love of learning in children and work closely with families to nurture students’ voices. We have six core values and use these values to shape our advisory curriculum and our classroom culture. We want students to graduate with a passion for ideas and to believe in themselves and their power to make the world better. To achieve our goals, we have strong collaborations with universities and cultural organizations (NYU School of Medicine, Urban Advantage. Teachers College, Metamorphosis). We have these partnerships in order to expose students and teachers to the habits of mind of professionals and as a way to give students’ authentic learning experiences and expand their possibilities; we focus intensely on nurturing students’ reading life across the curriculum by modeling our love for literacy in the planning of our environment and lessons; we have a strong culture of learners that we foster through high quality professional development and creative scheduling that allows for sharing of best practice; we are committed to meeting the needs of a diverse group of learners by differentiating instruction and using data to inform our teaching moves and interventions; we strategically align our budget and program to ensure that all students have a rich, rigorous program; we work as partners with parents to support student learning and encourage parent engagement in our learning community. Priority needs:  We will work to further align our advisory curriculum with our core values and Social Emotional Learning (SEL) competencies so that we further strengthen student relationships, connections with adults, and understanding of the competencies.  help students be better digital citizens by continuing to use commonsensemedia.org and an outside consultant to heighten student awareness about the responsible use of technology through teacher facilitated conversations in advisory groups  We will work with Student Council to strengthen the Gender and Sexuality Alliance (GSA) to further make our community a welcoming space for all students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will do at least 4 sessions in advisory around digital citizenship for students using a consultant and commonsensemedia.org. We will survey students mid year and at the end of the year about their responsible use of 2018-19 CEP 28  technology. Student Council will hold weekly GSA meetings supported by two faculty members and we will survey students mid-year and at the end of the school year about their sense of inclusion and use of the competencies. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will incorporate cyber safety awareness and responsible social media use guidelines into the advisory program by using commonsensemedia.org information and our consultant. all students including SWDs and ELLs Sept-June Principal and Dean will oversee all teachers will implement principal and guidance counselor will oversee all teachers will implement principal and assistant principal One faculty member and our guidance counselor will run the GSA and hold weekly meetings during lunch. Information and lessons from these sessions will be shared with teacher teams to be modified and implemented in advisory. alls tudents including SWDs and ELLs Sept-June The principal and AP will meet monthly with Team Leaders to review the advisory curriculum and its connections to the core values and SEL competencies. Team Leaders Sept-June na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, Family STEM Night, curriculum showcases, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Family Engagement Time, report cards providing descriptions of curriculum, monthly team newsletters, cyber safety and responsible social media use talks with a consultant. We will also hold workshops to educate parents about the SEL competencies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 30  Student Council meetings   Advisory meetings  Team Leader training on commonsensemedia.org  Teacher(s) to help run Student Council and GSA  Use support of Jared Fox (DOE's LGBT liaison)  We will work with the founder of netsafefamily.com to support student and parent workshops on cyber safety as well as commonsensemedia.org  monthly cabinet meetings with Team Leaders All teachers will implement the advisory curriculum and the principal will oversee the program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Student Council will survey students about the level of inclusion and safety at Salk. We will have 80% of students reporting that they feel more knowledgeable about cyber safety and more included in the school due to the GSA, Student Council, buddy events and other advisory activities that integrate the SEL competencies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Council survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have an active parent body and do many events to bring parents into the school to participate in workshops, chaperone trips, view their children’s work, build community, learn about DOE initiatives etc. Nevertheless, as per our learning environment survey, we can continue to strengthen communication and expectations with parents and increase parent input and participation in our events. Strengths: ● Active and engaged executive board, PA and class parents ● Many opportunities for parents to participate in the life of the school ● Teachers work in teams and in departments to communicate with parents about initiatives and student progress ● Warm, nurturing school culture ● Engaged learning specialists, parent coordinator and guidance counselor who communicate with families ● Partnerships with NYUSOM to support students at-risk ● Partnership with CBO, Manhattan Youth, for afterschool program ● Participate in Wellness in the School ● Use Educational Networks to facilitate communication Priority needs: To continue the effective partnership between parents and the school by ensuring parents are receiving the information they want regarding: outside speakers; the type and frequency of information provided by teachers about class work and student performance; the frequency and type of classroom events. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we aim to conduct a survey among all parents and evaluate the results. Some questions will be incorporated to specifically cover the opinions of parents of SWDs and ELLs. We will compare these results with the results from the previous year. In addition, we will use the NYC school environment survey to get feedback about communication and parent involvement. We aim to find any needs not currently addressed in terms of guest speakers, classroom visits, and communication. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct a survey (paper/electronic) to evaluate success of past events and evaluate parent satisfaction with these events. The survey will also ask for new suggestions for needs which may not be met yet. Parents and families Planning: Nov-Dec 2018 The survey will include a section targeted to parents of students with special needs to check their concerns are being addressed with speaker topics, events in the classroom and communication between parents and school personnel. Continue successful events, continue department talks, continue to offer quality guest speakers at PA meetings to draw a larger audience. Record the number of parents at these events wherever possible. SLT. Class parents and parent coordinator to distribute electronically. Implement January 2019 Parents and families Sept 2018 -June 2019 PA executive board. Various AM/PM dates Continue to decentralize PA organization into event committees, thereby delegating responsibility to wider group of parents. Parents and families Sept 2018 -June 2019 Invite parents at least 1 week in advance to classroom celebrations to help them plan their presence at these events. Parents and families Sept 2018-June 2019 PA president, executive board, parent coordinator. Parent coordinator. Send out monthly summaries to all parents about current topics of study in their child's class. Parents and families Sept 2018- June 2019 Teacher input in google classroom or summary from grade leader. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 34  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYUSOM, Manhattan Youth, Netsafefamily.com Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The parent association executive board will use Educational Networks and Survey Monkey to create and distribute survey electronically. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, create and distribute survey. Evaluate results by June in time to input changes for 2019-2020 school year. Create time line for speakers and agenda for PA meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The SLT survey will address if parent needs are being met and help evaluate other programs of interest. The NYC school environment survey will also provide feedback about communication and parent involvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1 or 2 on state test, grade of 80 or below Mathematics 1 or 2 on state test, grade of 80 or below Science Grade of 80 or below Social Studies Grade of 80 or below At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance, failing grades, behavior, social skills Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Pre-teaching, modified handouts, individual support with writing, after school help Pre-teaching, modified handouts, individual support with content, afterschool help Pre-teaching, modified handouts, leveled reading, individual support Pre-teaching, modified handouts, leveled reading, individual support Providing tools for organization, time management, and strategies for improving attendance Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one on one, after school help When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During day and after school Small group, one on one, afterschool help During day and afterschool Small group, one on one, afterschool help During day and afterschool Small group, one on one, afterschool help During day and afterschool One to one basis During the school day and afterschool mentoring 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are highly qualified. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 40  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Salk School of Science, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Salk School of Science will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Salk School of Science in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Salk School of Science Borough Manhattan School Number 255 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rhonda Perry Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melinda Reid Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Eng/Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Ling Teo/Humanities Related-Service Provider Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Jennifer Goodwin Coach N/A School Counselor Leslie Berck Parent Parent Coordinator Patti Burr Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 390 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 1 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.51% 2018-19 CEP 48  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Salk uses many formative and summative assessment tools to determine the literacy skills of the ELL population. Assessment informs instruction. In reading, teachers use Teachers College Reading Assessments. For ELLs, the teachers also administer Fountas and Pinell's oral reading assessment. By assessing students one-on-one, the teacher can determine, among other things, the student's prior knowledge, decoding ability, fluency, speed, stamina and strategies. The teachers differentiate instruction accordingly and form strategic homogenous groups and pairs. In writing, the teachers have the students write a personal narrative which is graded according to rubrics. Other writing assignments include: a historical fiction vignette, a persuasive speech, and poetry writing. Salk's two ELLs also meet with an IEP teacher one-on-one to work on reading comprehension and fluency. During these sessions, the ELLs take comprehension and spelling quizzes. Salk uses interim assessments provided by the NYC Department of Education, and the DYO (Design Your Own) option. Teachers use assessment in instruction as outlined in Framework For Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 49  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Differentiated rubrics and assessments are created to support this student in his reading and writing work. Leveled readings are administered as well as organizers to guide this student during the writing process. The content area teachers, learning specialists, and ENL teacher work in a team which meets regularly to share these assessments and discuss the progress of the student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? First, we look at the NYSESLAT scores to ascertain if the student is making gains in English language proficiency. Next, we analyze how well the ELL is faring on the ELA and NYS standardized content area exams. In humanities, baselines are collected for every writing unit, in which students flash draft and then revise their writing gradually after each mini-lesson. Students gather ideas about their books, which takes the form of building entries and deep thinking entries, which are also collected throughout the quarter and used as assessment tools to gauge growth and areas of improvement. This information enlightens the staff as to how well the ELL is progressing in academic achievement. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, this information is shared with all of the teachers in a meeting or sometimes via email. it is used to inform small groups, one-on-one conferences, and future instruction (continued practice, or teaching the same skill in a different way). Students give each other peer feedback and select reading and writing goals that they would like to focus on throughout the quarter. Pre-teaching material is accomplished during vocabulary instruction. Both ELL's have IEPs so they are in ICT classes which are often broken into small group instruction. If an ELL finds the task challenging, the ENL teacher can work with him one-on-one or in small groups with other students who need support. During lessons that the ENL teacher is not present, the other teachers monitor the ELL's progress, support him as needed and inform the ENL teacher how the ELL progressed during those lessons. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Salk does not have this grade span. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT reveal how students are performing in terms of being Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding. There are two former ELL's and one ELL. The two former ELL's are in 6th and 8th grade ICT classes. The seventh grade ELL is in a ICT class as well. The sixth and eighth graders both need support in writing. This was their lowest score on the NYSESLAT. The seventh grader has moved from Emerging to Transitioning to Expanding but now back to Transitioning. He has an IEP and he needs a lot of support. Writing tasks will also be a focus for the 7th grade ELL. The ENL teacher co-teaches with the 6th grade and 8th grade humanities teachers once a week and with the 7th grade humanities teachers twice a week. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) provides a summary of the students’ achievement and progress. The EDAT is also a way to target instructional programs to accelerate achievement among both ELLs and non-ELLs. The EDAT is shared with all staff. Adjustments to programs are made depending on subject area. The adjustments are made as needed by teachers referring to their ongoing assessments. For example if a student scored higher on the NYSESLAT than the others he is grouped with for ENL instruction, then he would be moved to another group which is at the same level. The staff also look at the ELLs' state test scores. Since the ELLs at Salk are in different grades, each ELL is grouped or paired with non-ELL students of the same ability depending on the skill or modality which is the focus of the lesson. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 50  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction is delivered in a stand alone class along with integrated instruction. During the ENL class, all of the ELLs can only be of two contiguous grades, meaning 6th and 7th or 7th and 8th , not 6th and 8th and they are in groups by proficiency level and the class is taught by a certified ENL teacher. Since both ELLs are at Expanding level, they are not taught in a standalone class. Each ELL receives integrated instruction where the ENL and humanities or ENL and math teachers co-teach. The number of minutes of instruction each week depends on the level of the ELL. For the two advanced levels of ELL, the integrated instruction can be another content area than ELA. The two ELL's receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction in math and humanities. Former ELLs receive services for 2 years after reaching the proficient/commanding level. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction each week. There are three former ELL's at Salk at this time. The ENL teacher co-teaches in humanities and science classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? When Salk has more than one ELL student in a grade, classes are organized so that ELLs in the same grade are placed in the same class. The administration uses the results on the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT to facilitate this process. Were the school to receive an influx of ELLs in different grades and on different proficiency levels, additional ENL teachers would be hired. Depending on their levels, ELL students may receive a stand alone ENL instruction and/or integrated ENL/ELA or another content area instruction or only integrated ENL/ELA or another content area instruction which depends on each student's level of ENL. The integrated instruction may be delivered by a dually certified ENL/Content Area teacher or co-teaching by the ENL teacher and the content area teacher. The ENL teacher ensures Entering students receive 180 minutes of stand alone ENL instruction and 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes per week while Emerging receive 90 minutes of stand alone ENL instruction along with 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes per week as per CR Part 154-2. Transitioning is required to receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction minutes along with 90 minutes of standalone ENL or integrated ENL instruction with any content area per week. Salk's Expanding ELL's receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA (or another content area) instruction per week. Commanding receives 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA (or another content area) instruction per week. Former ELLs receive services for 2 years after reaching the proficient/commanding level. In September 2017, the ENL teacher determined if any of the 6th graders, new 7th graders, and new 8th graders were former ELLs using RLER in ATS. There is one former ELL in 7th grade so this student receives 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA (or another content area) instruction per week. Students with the same home language are grouped together and there are word to word glossaries for students in each classroom along with books in their home languages included in classroom libraries. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 51  Salk offers a standalone ENL program along with the integrated instruction where the language of instruction is English. At this time, the ELL's receive integrated instruction. There is not a standalone ENL class because the ELL's are at Expanding. If there were, the ENL teacher would use the same materials as the content area teachers in her ENL class. For example, in 6th grade Humanities, the classes are reading the book Al Capone Does my Shirts and writing building entries after each class reading. The ENL teacher would also use the book in her class to ensure the ELL's comprehend the content and model building entries. The ENL teacher would also use the Connected Math program in her ENL class to teach the same concepts as the math teacher. In science, all teachers use Foss and Delta. A benefit of the standalone class would be that the class is much smaller so the students would receive more one on one support. If the teacher were to find the students do not understand a math concept or how to find a theme in a chapter for their building entry, the teacher would be able to review with the student(s). The ENL teacher can also receive feedback from the content area teachers. The content area teacher could ask the ENL teacher to give the student(s) more time to practice a certain task that he or she noticed was challenging for him or her in the class. In addition, the ENL teacher uses native language knowledge since the linguistic and cognitive interdependence between the first and second language facilitates learning academic English. The classroom library includes books in the students' first languages and if students speak low incidence languages, they are encouraged to bring native language books from home to read during independent readings. The class library is organized by genre, theme and author. All content area classrooms have extensive class libraries. Dictionaries that translate words from English to the native language are available in all content area classrooms. For example, Chinese language speakers would be given dictionaries that include pinyin, the system that transcribes Chinese phonetics. Technology enrichments in the native language are utilized.The ENL teacher uses Cummins' model of mapping a new word in the second language to a cognate in the student's native language. Classes are taught at Salk using Columbia University's Teachers College Reading and Writing Project workshop model combining mini-lessons with group, paired and independent work. Teaching is data driven using formative and summative assessments to make pedagogical decisions. Instruction is aligned to the Common Core Standards with teachers using literary and informational texts. When teaching writers workshop, the ENL teacher addresses grammar transfer issues as they arise. During readers and writers workshop, the ENL teacher confers with the ELLs to make sure the content is comprehensible. She helps the students access complex texts by helping the students understand Tier Two and Tier Three vocabulary and figurative language.The ENL teacher addresses all four ENL modalities: reading, writing, speaking and listening. The ENL teacher also co-teaches the mathematics and science classes. The science curriculum adheres to NYC's spiral scope and sequence using the full option (Foss, Delta and Se Pop). The teachers use A. Walqui's scaffolding techniques to assist ELLs. In teaching math, the school uses the Connected Mathematics Program (Pearson, Prentice Hall). This is a constructivist, hands-onprogram. It is very engaging but has a lot of written text and, at times, assumes a prior knowledge that can provide a challenge to ELLs. The ENL teacher "chunks" the text in order to make it more comprehensible. Differentiating instruction and using strategic grouping is an important pedagogical approach at Salk. At Salk, teachers do not teach subjects in isolation. For instance, the drama teacher works with the Humanities teachers in helping the students write and present monologues to the Greek Athenian Assembly as part of the study in Ancient Greece. The technology teacher instructs the students in using microsoft word and Excel, and designing power point presentations. In addition, the students learn to design digital stories using words, pictures, videos and music. Teachers integrate media and technology into classroom practices.These projects are great for all students and enrich language development for ELLs. In addition to having laptop carts on each floor, the school has iPad carts on each floor with many applications to assist instruction for ELLs. There are also ELA and math units for middle school ELLs along with outside resources available on the DOE website under Educator Resources for ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When Spanish speaking ELLs are first admitted into the NYC school system, they are administered the Spanish LAB. This tool helps teachers ascertain language skills in Spanish. In the future, were Salk to have a dual language or transitional bilingual program, students would have ongoing assessments in academic content areas as well as language development in two languages. This assessment would match the language of instruction and programmatic goals. ELLs read books in their native language during independent reading and the teachers have copies in English. The teacher can assess the student's comprehension by asking questions in English about the book the student is reading in the home languages. Native language 2018-19 CEP 52  support includes the use of bilingual dictionaries. When applicable, teachers group the students into strategic homogenous linguistic groupings and employ a buddy system. The teacher asks the parent how the child's HL is developing at home. If the teacher finds the student is not making progress in their HL development, more resources in that HL would be ordered. The teachers also have the Home Language Arts Progressions as a reference. In the future, were Salk to have groups of ELLs who share a common language, the school might organize Native Language Arts classes because research has shown that the more reading material that students read in the native language, the easier it is to transition to academic English proficiency. Native language support should be systemic and not limited to the ENL classroom. In addition to hard copy and/or online glossaries, dictionaries, books and other media in the native languages represented by ELLs, school personnel who are able to provide support to students during the school day should be utilized to provide clarification for ELLs (in their native languages), especially to those who may be struggling with content and concepts in their subject-area classes. Each of these strategies can extend to after and before school programs, as well as to summer school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Although we do not have SIFE students at the present time, age appropriate, high interest and beginner level reading materials such as the program RIGOR (Reading Instruction Goals for Older Readers) would be ordered. If necessary, the school would hire a translator to assess the student's level in content areas and the school would provide additional support for these students after school. Salk would apply for a grant for high needs populations to include professional development and parental involvement.Newcomers require more scaffolding strategies including pictorial support and realia to make the content comprehensible. Tier 1 and 2 words are the focus at this stage. Books with accompanying CD's and computer programs are utilized to help increase fluency and afford the student the opportunity to hear the English language read aloud. This, in turn, will familiarize the student with English cadence. NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year. Differentiating instruction is crucial in preparing students. The ENL teacher scaffolds the material making sure to work with literary and nonfiction texts and providing additional support in academic language when working with the Depth of Knowledge Levels. Teaching students how to use word-to word dictionaries and teaching cognates are among the strategies the ENL teacher uses with these students. In math, the concepts which involve a lot of text are chunked to support the ELLs. In science, books are provided with many pictures to provide comprehension of important concepts. For Developing ELLs, the focus is on Tier 2 and 3 words and with supporting content in the classrooms. In Humanities during the units on Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece, books on Greece and Egypt are available with many illustrations and photos. In math, the Connected Math program is used which is very hands-on which benefits all ELLs. In science, books are provided with many pictures to provide comprehension of important concepts. With long-term ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years of service, additional assessments would be administered. Different methodologies might be necessary. For instance, if the student were having difficulty decoding, the Wilson program might be used. Based on the Common Core Standards, the teacher would use Hiebert's "Text-Complexity Multi-Index" to match texts to the student. This is a research-based program. The goal would be to increase the students' fluency, comprehension and critical thinking using literary and informational texts. For long-term ELLs who have completed 6 years which is the subgroup of our 6th and 7th grade ELLs, the school carefully analyzes the data to determine when the issue is a language or a learning issue and decides to have the student assessed in their home language. The humantities classroom library contains high interest fiction and nonfiction reading materials at his reading level. One of the ELLs was also selected by the IEP teacher for the special reading program in the spring of 2017. During these one-on-one sessions, they worked on his reading comprehension and fluency. Salk has three former ELLs who receive testing accommodations according to their needs for those two years after testing proficient on the NYSESLAT. They also still receive ENL support for two years after reaching commanding. For each of the former ELLs, the EDAT is used to determine which classes to support each student. The ENL teacher co-teaches the former ELLs in humanities, science and math classes for 90 minutes per week. 2018-19 CEP 53  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? When working with ELL-SWDs, the goal is to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. The ENL teacher uses the students' IEPs as guides. She confers with the subject area teachers and the service providers so that the plan is coherent and language issues are not confused with disabilities. Some frequent and ongoing assessments are: admit/exit cards, stop and jot, turn and talk, jot pair share and SOS (statement, opinion, support) summaries. The ENL teacher also focuses on academic language, literacy and vocabulary. The teacher links background knowledge and the students' cultures to learning. Comprehensible input and language output must be increased to see progress in each student. Classroom interaction is promoted. The ENL teacher uses the same grade level materials as the content area teachers. The ENL teacher may help the student "chunk" the text to make it comprehensible. Technology used for ELLs is laptops, smartboards and iPads. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Salk uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of ELLs-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Salk provides a SETSS, and a ICT program. The IEP determines the least restrictive environment for each student. Using the integrated instruction, the ENL teacher co-teaches with the two ICT teachers. Sometimes the ELL is pulled out for small group work or one-on-one for part of the class. The student does not miss any work being pulled out of class. The ENL teacher uses the material that the subject area teacher is using and provides native language and scaffolding supports. The special education requirements are aligned with the LAP. In addition, for those ELLs-SWDs who are in ICT classes, the ENL teacher checks the notes of service providers on SESIS for additional information on how best help these students meet the IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Salk has targeted intervention programs for all students including ELLs who need additional support. These are offered in English. Strengthening classroom instruction (i.e., the instructional core), is a key step to supporting ELLs at-risk for or experiencing difficulties, as well as a critical step in fully implementing the RtI model. Intensive, targeted intervention is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and/or competencies measured. Progress monitoring informs how at-risk students are responding to instruction. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL’s progress takes into account language development and background. The student’s progress is then compared with levels demonstrated by peers from comparable cultural, linguistic, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or comparable intervention. These students may be pulled out for extra support in small groups or individually. The science, humanities, and math classes are ICT classes so the students often work in smaller groups which is beneficial for ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries are available for ELLs as needed. Many interventions that are not designed for ELLs may still work with ELLs when they are coupled with instructional routines that are research-based and appropriate for linguistically diverse learners. It should be noted that the most important step in identifying the “right” Tier 2 and 3 supports is using assessments that are precise and tailored to the discrete skill(s) students may need to further develop. There are Tier 2 and 3 services designed with a goal of further developing literacy skills and sub-skills. Some students may need additional support with certain skills and this can be determined by using screeners and formative assessments. (i.e., formative, screening, progress monitoring, and outcome). There is a Response to Intervention Guide for teachers of ELLs on the DOE website. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A program Salk is considering is a buddy system between PS 40 and Salk students which would give ELLs and former ELLs the opportunity to practice their English with younger students. Another possibility is to expand the ELL library so we have more books in ELLs' and former ELLs' home languages. The 6th grade ELL is from Albania and Salk should increase the number of resources in Albanian for that student. 2018-19 CEP 54  A program which has been implemented this year is Google classroom which aids in the communication between parents and staff to share information about school work and homework. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There was never a bilingual program at Salk School of Science, MS 255. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Each class has at least two class parents who communicate with all of the other parents. Information about the after school program is on the Salk website. The after school program is led by Manhattan Youth. It is every school day from 2:30 to 6:00 beginning the first day of school, students are able to participate in an exciting array of programs from sports to arts and crafts to many science and engineering activities. These programs are open to all students. Each parent has a Salk parent email and will be emailed the fall schedule of the after school program in August.In addition to a wonderful after school program, all students are part of a rigorous and fun-filled academic program. Sixth graders enjoys a rigorous program of humanities, math, science, science research and writing, advisory, drama, art and physical education during the school day. Seventh graders have a two-year study of Spanish. Selected eighth grade students take the Spanish proficiency exam in June in order to be eligible for a more advanced foreign language placement in high school and eighth grade students have the option of taking the Algebra high school regents. Once again, for the second half of the year, all students will be able to select from an exciting array of electives. Students choose from a menu of electives offered during the spring semester for one day a week for fifty minutes. These electives includes activities such as chess, dance, drama, film and art. The school has many partnerships that enhance learning and provide greater individualized instruction to students including ELLs. Among these partners are NYU School of Medicine. In addition, the school partners with the NY Botanical Gardens and the NY Hall of Science. Salk is,also, part of the Urban Advantage in which the school works closely with the American Museum of Natural History to enhance inquiry-based science learning by utilizing the resources of NYC. ELLs are invited to participate in all of these programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher uses the material that the content area class is using and incorporates ENL scaffolding methodologies to improve English language proficiency and increase content knowledge. In Humanities, teachers use materials designed by Columbia University's Teachers College Readers and Writers Workshop. The teachers, then work collaboratively using the Common Core Standards to add to the curriculum. The ENL teacher helps the ELLs with grammatical structures and vocabulary. The ENL teacher has a collection of bilingual dictionaries which is distributed to classrooms with ELLs and former ELLs as needed. If an ELL student were admitted and the school did not have a dictionary in his/her home language, one would be ordered. In addition, the ENL teacher uses technology enrichments in the native language to provide support. There are also 4 laptop carts and 1 iPad cart on each floor of the school. Each classroom has a document camera and either a Prometheum, ENO or Smart board. Each science classroom has a class set of headphones. Brainpop is also used in the science classroom to explain and/or introduce concepts which benefits ELLs. The math teachers use BAMBOO pads which they write on and then it is displayed on the Prometheum, ENO or Smart board. Last June, the school received 70 Kindles which the administration rolled out to the teachers over the summer. This fall, the teachers will meet to decide how best to use the Kindles in the classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Salk School of Science, MS 255, has a freestanding ENL program along with integrated instruction. ELLs are encouraged to read books in their native language during independent reading. Native language support includes the use of bilingual dictionaries. When applicable, teachers group the students into strategic homogenous linguistic groupings and employ a buddy system. In the future, were Salk to have groups of ELLs who share a common language, the school might organize Native Language Arts classes because research has shown that the more reading material that students read in the native language, the easier it is to transition to academic English proficiency. Native language support should be systemic and not limited to the ENL classroom. In addition to hard copy and/or online glossaries, dictionaries, books and other media in the native languages represented by 2018-19 CEP 55  ELLs, school personnel who are able to provide support to students during the school day should be utilized to provide clarification for ELLs (in their native languages), especially to those who may be struggling with content and concepts in their subject-area classes. Each of these strategies can extend to after and before school programs, as well as to summer school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Each class library has a wide range of books to support students below, at and above grade level in reading, but appropriate for that grade. For example, in science, they are used to help students write their lab reports. In the humanities classrooms, there are diverse collections of resources on ancient Egypt and other topics they cover throughout the year. Were the school to enroll older ELLs, Salk would purchase appropriate materials suited to these students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Salk School of Science, MS 255, shares a building with PS 40. Salk's classrooms and offices are on the top two floors, the fourth and fifth floors. The schools share the gymnasium, the auditorium, the cafeteria, and the courtyard. The administrations of the two schools coordinate to ensure there are no conflicts. Salk has scheduled PE classes in the gymnasium, scheduled free time before lunch in the courtyard, and school events such as the talent show in the auditorium. Salk students who choose to have lunch in the cafeteria eat at the same time as some of the PS 40 students and are supervised by Salk staff. Salk staff observes all of the students and checks in on how they are doing during free time and lunch. There are designated tables for each school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In June, before entering Salk, all 5th grade students who will be attending Salk are invited to a Welcoming Tea which is organized by the parent coordinator, the 6th grade team leader, and the guidance counselor. At this event, the students and their parents meet the 6th grade staff team and other incoming students. If there are newly enrolled ELLs in other grades, the ENL teacher takes them and their parents on a tour of the school before the school year begins. In addition, Salk has a "Buddy" program in which 7th and 8th graders help 6th graders, including all ELLs, acclimate themselves to middle school. For new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year, if possible, they are introduced to students with the same home language by the assistant principal or the ENL teacher. This student becomes a buddy for the new ELL. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Seventh and eighth grade students at Salk study Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 56  The goal of staff development at Salk is to increase student achievement and engagement. Teachers are analyzing and learning how to use the principles set forth in Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching to evaluate best practices. Teachers are focusing on questioning techniques. They are, also, learning techniques to teach argument writing. At staff development meetings, teachers are learning to use the best research-based strategies to targeted groups including ELLs. Staff developers from Columbia University's Teachers College Readers and Writers Workshop provide additional support to all teachers including teachers of ELLs. Salk provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. At least 15% of 175 hours of professional development over 5 years for all teachers as prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. This is provided by the ENL teacher. The secretaries are trained by the ENL coordinator about ELL identification, input of Home Language codes into ATS, and the use of particular ATS reports which find potential ELLs and former ELLs each year. The ENL teacher attends various conferences throughout the school year dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. During the 2017-18 school year, the ENL teacher will attend bi-monthly meetings led by an ELL Services Coordinator which will cover such topics as: integrated co-teaching for ELLs, the New Language Arts progressions, analyzing language demands and developing language objectives, close reading, NYSESLAT and ELA task analysis – (using the instructional organizer), factual, interpretive and evaluative questions for text-based discussion , academic conversations, the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), reciprocal teaching, and Q-TEL Strategies for Writing –Authority List. Election Day and a day in early June are Chancellor's Conference Days which are days devoted to staff development. These are days when the ENL teacher has an opportunity to attend an ELL workshop or take what she has learned at these workshops which is relevant to all teachers and turnkey the information to the teachers, guidance counselor, secretary and parent coordinator at Salk. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR Part 154.2, all teachers in the school including non-ELL teachers are provided with 15% of total hours of professional development in teaching ELLs. The administration has opted to use a coaching model to deliver this support. Using this model, the ENL teacher goes into the subject area classrooms. She observes lessons, models ENL strategies and articulates with the teachers. She assists subject area teachers in using ELL data as a tool to differentiate instruction and explains how A. Walqui's scaffolding strategies including text re-presentation, use of realia, schema building, metacognition and modeling can impact academic performance. She explains and/or demonstrates how Norman Webb's Depth of Knowledge levels can be made more comprehensible to ELLs. The ENL teacher will present a workshop on the NYSELAT, looking at how the ELLs at Salk performed and how the content areas can help prepare them for the next NYSESLAT on Election Day. On the Chancellor's Conference Day in June, the ENL teacher will give another ELL related workshop based on the needs of the ELLs and the staff. The ENL teacher also ensures that she attends as many workshop as possible offered by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. Copies of agendas and attendance are saved in the ENL office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? An annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs is scheduled by the ENL teacher to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language 2018-19 CEP 57  development needs in all content areas. The ENL teacher calls the parent/guardian and uses an interpreter if needed. The ENL teacher leads the meeting. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. If the parent/guardian cannot attend in person, the meeting is held over the phone. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Salk has a very diverse student and parent population. A concerted effort is made to get all parents involved. This process begins with our recruitment efforts as a choice school. In order to attract a diverse student population, brochures about the school are made available in languages other than English. The process continues with our well-attended annual Welcoming Tea for incoming sixth graders and their parents are afforded the opportunity to meet staff members, parent association officers, some current students and each other in June. At the beginning of the school year, Salk hosted a Curriculum Night on October 3rd where parents met their children's teachers and were informed of curricular expectations. Among other ways the school tries to involve all parents is by hosting the annual Salk International Dinner for families and staff on November 2nd. For that occasion, parents are encouraged to prepare a dish to celebrate their cultural heritage. The 6th graders host an Egyptian night in February and all of the grades show a science exploratorium in late May/early June. The parent coordinator is involved in the planning of many school activities such as Curriculum Night, parent teacher conferences, the 7th grade trip to Washington D.C. from May 23rd-25th, the 6th and 8th grade trips to Greenkill, and Auction Night. Parents of ELLs are included in all of these activities and when needed translators are provided. The parent coordinator reaches out to all of the families and encourages every family's involvement in the school activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rhonda Perry, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Salk School of Science School DBN: 02M255 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rhonda Perry Title Principal Jennifer Goodwin Assistant Principal Patti Burr Parent Coordinator Melinda Reid ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jessica Eng/Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Ling Teo/Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Leslie Berck School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 255 School Name: The Salk School of Science Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Melinda Reid ENL Teacher no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Salk ensures that Limited English speaking parents are provided with written translation and oral interpretation services. In June, incoming parents fill out the Language Preference Form. This form queries parents as to their oral and written translation needs. In addition, the ENL teacher checks the RAPL report on ATS in the beginning of the school year. This report can be used to find the school’s language access demographic. This report pulls data from the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), student emergency contact cards, and optional surveys conducted by the school. When new students are enrolled, the school determines the primary language of the parent and whether the parent requires language assistance. This is ascertained at the time of registration. Additional ways Salk collects data are: the ATS Report of Preferred Languages and a Teacher Survey (to collect data by class). A report is updated regularly with the languages that parents speak, by class and grade. 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese Cantonese Croatian German Hebrew Italian Korean Mandarin Nepali English Polish Russian Serbian Spanish Thai 14 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 574 1 0 1 2 1 2.34 0 0.17 0.17 0 0.17 0.17 0 0.17 95.99 0.17 0 0.17 0.33 0.17 11 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 571 1 2 1 2 1 1.84 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.33 0.17 95.48 0.17 0.33 0.17 0.33 0.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent teacher conferences November, March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school will complete Translation Request forms and submit them to the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit of the DOE for parent-facing documents in the 9 official languages (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, 2018-19 CEP 62  High School Information Workshop September Curriculum Night Walking Permission Slip Behavior Policy Cell Phone Policy Internet Use Out of School for Lunch Form 6th Grade Trip to Greenkill International Potluck 8th Grade Trip to Greenkill 7th grade trip to Washington DC Auction Night Haiti Fundraiser 8th grade cruise 8th grade graduation Welcome Tea for Incoming 6th graders September September September September September September September November January May June June June June June Korean, Russian, Urdu and Spanish), allowing for a three week turn-around period. The T&I Unit’s Intranet page contains templates and pertinent school translated documents. For those parents who need translation services and do not read a covered language, the DOE’s primary vendor, The Big Word, will be utilized if a bilingual school staff member, family member or friend is not available. See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above See above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide High School Information workshop September interpretation service(s)? For scheduled events and if an in-house staff member or parent volunteer is not available or appropriate, the school will complete an interpretation request form and contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the DOE. In addition, the school can hire interpreters through DOE approved vendors. At the present time, the 2018-19 CEP 63  proficient bilingual staff include one Chinese speaker, one French speaking staff member and at least three Spanish speaking staff members who are called upon to assist. Curriculum Night September parent-teacher conferences November, March IEP meetings throughout the year see above see above see above 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. When contacting a student's household of parents who cannot communicate proficiently in English in the event of a school emergency, one of the proficient bilingual school staff will call or a staff member will call the Translation and Interpretation unit of the DOE for an over-the-phone translation. Language Line is also directly available to all DOE schools by calling Language Line and using the DBN pass code (02M255=02600255). Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On one of the staff development days before the first day of school, the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will remind the staff of the goal of the school to provide limited-English proficient parents with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. The LAC will discuss the T&I Unit’s free translation services for parent-facing documents in the 9 official languages (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian-Creole, Korean, Russian, Urdu, and Spanish) and the Big Word, the DOE’s primary vendor, for other languages. For formal and informal face-to-face interactions such as parent-teacher conferences and IEP meetings, the interpretation needs of the school may be covered by proficient bilingual staff, over-the-phone interpretation, and/or hired in-person interpreters through DOE vendors. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is placed on the front door of the main office of Salk. The links to the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access which are found on the NYCDOE website will be added to the parent section of the Salk website. Hard copies are also kept in the main office and the parent coordinator's office. The sixth graders who have limited-English proficient parents will be given hard copies to take home the first week of school. Hard 2018-19 CEP 64  copies will be distributed to limited-English proficient parents at the first PTA meeting and other school events in September and October. The Language ID Guide will be kept at the security desk and in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be given by the LAC in the middle of the school year. The DOE T&I Unit will be contacted for translations as needed. Using the feedback, changes will be made to improve Salk's communication with parents of home languages other than English. 2018-19 CEP 65 
