2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M293 School Name: CITY COLLEGE ACADEMY OF THE ARTS Principal: BURNEDETTE DRYSDALE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: City College Academy of the Arts 310600011293 6-12 4600 Broadway NY NY 10040 212 567-3164 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 06M293 212 567-3958 Fax: Dr. BurnedetteDrysdale bdrysdale@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Burnedette Drysdale Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dennis Mihalsky Lenny Ciccone Martin Toomajian OrquideaHuerta Grismeldys Beato MigdaliaCortes Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue NY NY Fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-7523 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity schools CUNY/AU FSC: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, Room 608 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Burnedette Drysdale Dennis Mihalsky Lenny Ciccone OrquideaHuerta GrismeldysBeato MigdaliaCortes Rosa Lazala ZoilaGarcia YissetParra Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristy Gallo Martin Toomajian Alrye Osborne Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? City College Academy of the Arts (CCAA) is a 6 through 12 early college secondary school. With the City College of New York (CCNY) and the Early College Initiative (ECI), we have designed a learning community that is safe, supportive, rigorous, and challenging. CCAA students graduate with up to 60 college credits CCNY. The arts are the conduit through which students develop the skills to become problem solvers, critical thinkers, and analytical learners. CCAA is committed to ensuring that its students succeed not only in college but as valued members of their families and community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual Information: City College Academy of the Arts (CCAA) is located in the Salome Urena Education Campus which is located in the Washington Heights Section of Manhattan. CCAA shares its campus with the Salome Urena Leadership Academy and a community based organization, Children's Aid. The building is open to the residents of the community six-days per week year round. CCAA was created in 2005 in collaboration with the New York City Department of Education, the Early College Initiative (ECI) and City College of New York with funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The school is designed to give students, traditionally under-represented in higher education, a rigorous and intellectually challenging educational experience that prepares them for enrollment in college courses beginning in the 9th grade of High School.  Starting in the 6th grade students begin to meet requirements that informs the culture of this early college school o Students participate in Saturday Academy o Students are programmed for a mandated reading class o Students are taught classes in social and emotional development by guidance counselors o Parents are taught a variety of weekly classes in the areas such as social and emotional supports and development for teenagers, computer literacy, nutrition, and leadership by CCAA's staff and Children's Aid o Parents participate in a year end-of-year retreat that is organized and facilitated by Children's Aid and a summer camp for parents  Eight grade students take up to four (4) New York State Regents Examinations in English, the living  environment, algebra, and US History & Government Students enter the 9th grade with up to eight (8) high school credits and up to four (4)Regents credits. By June 2018, 53% of students entering the 9th grade have completed four Regents and earned eight high school credits.  Ninth grade students take Freshman seminar to help them transition from middle school to high school and to prepare them for their first college in the spring semester fo the ninth grade  Middle school students participate in a plethora of college and career readiness activities: 6 grades: trips to City College of New York, CUNY 7th Grade  Participate in College Access for All  Visit to a major University  Walking tour of colleges in NYC (such as those around Morningside Heights  June Institute @ City College of New York, CUNY 8th Grade   o Participation in Jump Nation Weekend Visit to Binghamton University, SUNY o 8-week Bridge to College Seminar @ City College of NY, CUNY wherein the students select a seminar course from departments such as the Sophie Davies School of Biomedical Studies, architecture, Media Studies, Art, Theater, Dominican Institute and The School of Engineering  o As a result of the accelerated coursework that occurs in the middle school, by the end of the ninth grade, a majority of CCAA students have met the 5-Regents requirements for graduation from high school and their high school course requirements at the of the tenth grade. This allows for a modified 2018-19 CEP 10  high school schedule and a dominant college based high school program for a majority of students. As such, most of CCAA eleventh grade students are programmed for high school courses in the morning and college courses in the afternoon. Seniors, on the other hand, are programmed as full time students and return to the high school intermittently to complete their college applications, and for their senior seminar course. This unique schedule has made is feasible for our students to meet or surpass the 60 college threshold that is the school's mission. Indeed, at the end of this school year, it is anticipated that 37% of our students will earn over 60 college credits from the City College of New York, CUNY and one will earn 82.. CCAA has an alternate pathway to college and career readiness for seniors who are not ready for a liberal arts college experience. This pathways combines the YABC program and COOPTECH. Seniors participating in this program attend CCAA in the mornings, and then attend COOPTECH to participate in certification in a plethora of CTE programs such nursing, plumbing, and cooking. Students in need of additional credits towards graduation then attend classes at YABC which meets in the afternoon/evenings. CCAA requires its seniors to complete a career readiness internship experience that is coordinated by its CBO-Children's Aid. To graduate from CCAA, students are required to complete 30 hours of community service and a senior internships with a range of organizations such as Councilmen Levine and Rodriguez, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, and Isabella Geriatric Center. Collaboration/Partnership: CCAA has had a 12 year partnership with its community-based organization--Children’s Aid (CA). Children's Aid provides a wealth of support through programs such as its school based medical, dental & mental health clinics which provides services to the students within the building. CA also maintains a family room (SUMA Room) that offers a variety of weekly classes and workshops for parents on a wide range of topics ranging on PASOS (college readiness) to nutrition through Cornell University. CA manages an after school programs, holiday programs and leadership programs for teens which supports families within the community. Our relationship with CA has been unique in several ways as CA provides: Leadership training for students beginning in the eight grade   Hires high school students to work in its after-school & holiday programs  Coordinates the senior seminar which is a graduating requirement for seniors at CCAA  Coordinates the Access for all 7th grade College and career readiness curricula  Coordinates the 7th grade trip to a major university and walking college tour  Coordinates the 8th grade Jump Nation trip to Binghamton University, SUNY  Coordinates the schools afterschool programs ACE (literacy) and SONYC In addition to City College of New York and the Children's Aid, CCAA has many other partnerships that enrich the experience of its students. These include:  Christodora Foundation: Supports the work of the 6 and 8th grade science teachers. In the 6th grade science educators engage the students in a seven week winter ecology program (WEP). The program utilizes an inquiry based curriculum via which students are engaged in activities such as:In the 8th grade, Christodora provides a different experience for 30 students studying the living environment. These students spent three days and two nights at Manice Education Center in Florida, Mass. The program is focused on ecology and wilderness survival, as well as leadership trainings in communication and critical thinking. The lessons provide hands-on enrichment to the NYC Dept. of Education Scope and Sequence and help improve academic proficiency in science, math and analytical skills. Equally important, they foster trust in peers and adults, and cooperation and interdependence within the group. Impact: 85% pass rate on New York State living environment Regents Examination  Christodora Ecology: After school ecology program. Students travel to Inwood park to study its wildlife and learn leadership skills. Students in grades 9 will be mentored by students from NYU. Grades 7-9  Theatre Development Fund: Provides residences via which artists work with students to interpret drama and poems. Resident artist interpret student crafted scripts in class and in off broad-way performances. Students attend musicals such as Mathilda and Kinky Boots & dramas such as Fences and Curious Tale of the Dog in the 2018-19 CEP 11  Night. Impact: 98% pass rate on the New York State Common Core English Regents Examination with more than 50% of the students earning above an 85-the State’s criterion for mastery. Grade 9  The Julliard School: Artists work with teachers in classes such as English, art and music to teach students about music. Artists conduct CCAA based dance and string performances for students. Artists teach students beginning in grade 6 to play string instruments. Impact: Students develop stronger writing skills. Students develop the skills to perform publicly in places such as Isabella Geriatric Center, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital and CCAA Senior Graduation. Grades 6-12  The Julliard School 2018: Introduction of piano program for students who are versed in piano (up to 5-6 students)  Carnegie Hall: Artists work with teachers in classes such as English, art and music to teach students about music. Artists conduct CCAA based performances for students. Impact: Students develop stronger writing skills. Students the skills to perform publicly in places such as Isabella Geriatric Center, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital and CCAA Senior Graduation. Grades 6-12  Gilda Lehrman Foundation: Teachers and students student the life of Alexander Hamilton. Teachers guided students through a series of activities that were developed by students. CCAA students were selected to perform their project on the stage where the Musical is currently being performed. They and 1,000 other students were then privileged to watch the musical for $10 per seat. Impact: Students determined how they would like to present their final work and performed it on stage. Grade 11  YMCA: Provides students with free SAT/ACT preparation classes. Impact: For 2017 school year students have been accepted to colleges such as Stanford, NYU, Emerson, University of Southern California, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Purdue, the SUNY’s, The CUNY’s, Boston University, Princeton, Columbia, Marist, Hamilton, Ithaca and Syracuse University. Grades 10-11  Options: Works with students on the college application process. Facilitates college tours, provides SAT/ACT prep classes, and ensures that all deadlines are met. Impact: For 2017 school year students have been accepted to college such as Stanford, NYU, Emerson, Purdue, the SUNY’s, The CUNY’s, Boston University, Princeton, Columbia, Marist, Hamilton, Ithaca and Syracuse University. Grades 11-12  PSAL: CCAA students participate in a variety of sports teams such as soccer, softball, basketball & volleyball. Impact: In 2016 one of students was recruited to play basketball for Syracuse University and another for Alfred State, SUNY. Grades 9-12  CHAMPS: Student in both middle are members of CCAA cross country team that runs throughout the school year. Impact: Students develop the skills to be long distance runners which is important for health and wellness. Grades 6-12  Urban Debate Team: Students compete across the City in debates. Impact: Two CCAA students earned scholarships to compete with the Urban Debate Team in debates at universities such as Harvard, Yale, Princeton and Georgetown. Grades 9-12  Chess: We have lost our partnership with Chess in Schools. However, a student has stepped in to lead the team. shehas become the teacher of the the chess club. She is teaching in grades 6-11 various moves and strategies. An AP supervises weekly and I will attend tournaments with the team  TOP: Transition Opportunity Program. Funded through the DOE provides an opportunity for special education students to earn paid job experience based on an area of their own interest. High School Students  ACE: Funded through CA. After school program that provides literacy supports for 25 students who have scored at a performance level 2 on New York State middle school examinations. Grade 6  Teen Tutoring (LINC): 8th grade students “adopt” reading partners from P.S. 5, the local elementary school. The students read to their partners and teach them literacy strategies. Impact: Students hone their reading skills becoming stronger readers while helping the emerging readers develop their reading skills. Fridays, October-May.  APBI: An organization that works with CCAA to provide cycles of inquiry around social-emotional supports for students. Grade 6, 7 & 9. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 12  CCAA is focused supporting its multilanguage (MLLs) and special education students (SPEDs). The focus is to ensure that the students not only graduate high school, but that they earn up to 60 college credits. As of June 2017, every MLL has graduated with a Regents or Advanced Regents diploma, and only one SPED student has graduated with a local diploma. MLL services are provided by two fully certified teachers in grades 6-12. The teachers either co-teach or provide stand alone services for these 40 students. They use a variety of strategies to increase the students literacy skills including, debating strategies, Harkness/Socratic Seminar, theater arts graphic organizers and read alouds. Students primarily receive support services in English language arts, social studies and Reading (grades 6 & 7) , however, supports are also provided in other academic subjects through the school's Academic Support Center (ASC), SONYC Program (6-8). There are also opportunities for the students to participate in Saturday Academy, peer tutoring (provided by seniors) and lunch & learn. Both MLLs will attend professional development activities to inform their practices and will in turn, facilitate professional development activities to their colleagues as to how to support MLLs during the November cycle of professional learning. CCAAA's 100 SPEDs students needs are multi-layered requiring careful adherence to Individual Education Plan in order to ensure that the needs of the students are being met. CCAA follows the ICT model of special education services for all students. ICT classes are available in mathematics, English, social studies and science. SPED students who are in danger of falling behind on their credit accumulation at the high school level also attend Academic Support Center (ASC), Lunch and Learn and Saturday Academy. Middles school students are supported through SONYC, CBO-Children's Aid Society, Saturday Academy and Lunch and Learn. Related services such as speech and SETTS are provided as push-in or pull-out depending on the student's IEP. This year, CCAA has divided its IEP services between two coordinators one for the middle school and one for the high school. The SPEDs departments have also been relocated to the areas where the middle and high school guidance counselors are located to create a coherency between both. The goal is to create IEPs that truly will ensure that our students are successful. Special education teachers and an IEP coordinator will facilitate a professional development workshop on the November 20`18 Chancellor's Professional Development day on writing and reading the IEP for teachers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Progress Within the Elements of the Framework for Great Schools 1. Data from the NY State Regents Examination, Graduation Tracker showing high school students' credit accumulation, CCAA's graduation rate, MOTP ratings of teachers using the Danielson Rubric, observation of CCAA instructional practices and academic supports informed CCAA;s dialogue about its progress within the areas of rigorous instruction:  In 2017-2018, CCAA added the NY State English Regents Examination to the list of assessments that 8th grade students have the option of taking prior to beginning high school. In June of 2018, 53% of the school's 8th graders completed four New York State Regents Examinations and will enter the 9th grade in the September of 2018 with eight high school credits. It is anticipated that this cohort of students will complete the 4+1 graduation requirement for high school by the end of their 9th grade year.  Teachers' instructional practices were focused around the question of what would happened if the teacher did not speak? To that end, what emerged was pedagogy such as: o Socratic Seminar/Harkness which engaged the students in student lead discussion.. As a part of their creativity work, students created graphic novels, songs and Pod Casts on issues such "should school safety officers carry guns in schools?" 2018-19 CEP 13  o Debates in which the students engaged in research and arguments for and against issues o Students in grades 7 & 8 were taught using the resources and curricula of Debating US History (CUNY) and Facing History. Both curricula focus on the use of primary and secondary documents. o Students in geometry were introduced to the Inspiror calculators which contains their text books, and assessments. The teacher is able to assess the students, provide immediate feedback and adjust student groups immediately to provide supports for students so needing. o Art students engaged in "public" assessment of their work.(FIQWS) students in puppetry and landscape architecture classes present their works for critique, by CCAA students and staff at the end of each semester 2.. Supportive Environment: Data from sources such as those proved by the school's CBO-Children's Aid Society identifying the number of students who are accessing the services of the medical, medical and dental clinic, teachers reporting on the number of students leading parent-teacher conferences, the parent-coordinating reporting on the number of parents attending parent engagement workshops, data from OORS regarding student suspension rates, the number of students attending academic support classes including Saturday classes and clubs informed the school's the decision that supportive environment was an area of growth. The following are the supporting facts: At CCAA, every child is known by more than one adult. This relationship begins in advisory where each, child is greeted daily by two teachers and extends through the day via small classes. Our knowledge of students is also evident in the following ways:  Students lead parent teacher conferences. They create self-improvement plans and share those plans with their parents  Guidance counselors teach lessons on social and emotional issues such as coping strategies, organizational skills and middle/high school survival skills  Restorative justice practices include: Mind up (during lunch), Mediation, APBI which in 2017-2018 focused on student choice/student voice, 1-to-1 guidance counseling, small group counseling and mental health support through the school's community based organization, Children's Aid Inquiry team works with the guidance team to identify students who are in need of additional supports and to ensure that those supports are provided:  o Academic Support Center (ASC): 4-day per week for high school students who are in danger of falling behind on their credits o Alternative Pathway to College and Career Readiness: Students attend COOP-TECH and YABC in the afternoons and evenings after taking morning classes at CCAA and/or CCNY o Summer School: How can summer school BEST supports the needs of our students: Student can earn 3 credits-how do we ensure that we are maximizing this opportunity for students  Children's Aid provides weekly workshops for parents on a wide variety of topics including speaking to teenagers, Accessing Pupil Path, and preparing students for middle school Examinations and four Regents Examinations.  CCAA's teachers and guidance counselors teach classes and workshops to parents and teacher around various topic related social and emotional development including identifying signs of self harm, applying to high schools, and talking to teens  Medical, mental and dental health services are available to all student through our school based mental, medical and mental clinics ` 3. Collaboration: Data were derived from the schools PD plan, weekly professional development activities and opportunities for teachers to attend a plethora of workshops offered through Affinity, the DOE, CUNY, ECI and other sources CCAA continues to focus a part of its professional learning cycles around trust and collaboration. Its CBO-Children's Aid conducted professional development workshops around these two themes. for 2018-2019 the cycles of 2018-19 CEP 14  professional learning will be developed by the teacher leaders under the coordination of the professional development coordinator who is also a teacher. Inter-visitation: Provided opportunities for teachers to share best practices. The professional learning team adapted the inter-visitation protocol created by the UFT to ensure that it met the needs of the teachers of CCAA. Using this protocol, content area teachers inter-visit and provide feedback to their colleagues. Teachers also used this protocol when inter-visiting with their colleagues at the directive of their supervisor. 4. Parent Engagement: CCAA's parent coordinator, ENL teacher, guidance counselors and CBO-Children's Aid Society work closely with the PTA, Drama Club and ENL teachers on a variety of activities to engage parents in school activities. These include: workshops on topics such as nutrition (via Cornell University), Passos (college and career readiness), and accessing PupilPath. Our challenges: Data gained from the school environment survey,  Ensuring that all students including students with learning disabilities and ENLs have access to early college courses @ CCNY  Providing collaborative learning support for teachers and staff that will improve not only teachers' instruction but also students’ outcomes. For example, the principal should become more visible during professional development activities (including leading professional development activities)  Increasing parent engagement as evident by a 10% increase in parent participation workshops and other activities offered by CCAA and its CBO-Children's Aid Society. 2018-2019 Areas of Focus Building a collaborative learning community-through professional development. Some professional development cycles will be facilitated by the principal and CTLE providers available through CUNY, Affinity, and other sources. To allow this, CCAA has opted for the default option for professional development which is a part of the UFT Contract. This option will allow teachers to continue to engage in other professional team work as a part of the circular six mandate which is also a UFT Contract mandate. Data for the focus on this area was informed informed by 39% of teachers reporting that the principal participated in professional development activities on the school environment survey and the UFT Consultative Committee reports that a majority of teachers would like more options to gain CTLE hours as a part of the cycles of professional development. The committee is also committed to working with the school's administrative to increasing celebrations for staff and families including events such as a staff coffee hour, celebrating birthdays and ensuring there are snacks at meetings, and having CBO-Children's Aid Society attend and facilitate workshops. Strengthening CCAA;s family-community ties: Create a family welcome center-room 122, organize workshops for parents that are led by teachers and staff of CCAA as well as, encourage parents to attend PPT during parent engagement time to celebrate and plan for students' success, Encouraging families to use PupilPath to communicate with teachers and staff continuously. Data for this ongoing area of growth was derived from the parents responses on the school environment survey and their expressed concerns at PTA meetings. 2018-19 CEP 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M293 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 602 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 13 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 3 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 78.4% % Reduced Lunch 5.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 91.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 96% 94.9% 15.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 113 104 93.3% 3.8% 14.6% 3.5% 1.5% 0.7% 6 33% 4.2 39.2% 33% 95% 98% 100.0% 58% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In 2016-2017 96% of CCAA's high school students successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and exams compared to 49% citywide and 74% graduated college ready (met CUNY's standards for avoiding remedial classes compared to the citywide standard of 47%. in June 2018, 29% of the students who graduated CCAA earned over 60 college credits from CCNY, and CCAA again had a graduation rate of 99%. Also, 53% of the students entering the 9th grade in the fall of 2018 will have completed four Regents Examinations (LE; ELA; US History and English Language Arts (ELA) and will do so with eight high school credits. 2. Recently, there has been a marked shift in the number of students attaining levels 3s and 4s in grades 6 and 7 on the New York State middle school ELA test and a shift in number attaining mastery on the English Regents Examination. For example, 76% of the schools 8th grade students are, according to the DRP assessments administered in September 2018 are reading below grade level and the June 2018 NY State Regents data showed that of the 86% who passed this Regents Examination, only 54% met the CUNY Standard. As a result of this shift, CCAA has instituted two initiatives. MSQI and Empowering Young Writers, at the middle school grades and teacher teams are focused on how to support students in this areas across content and grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CCAA will implement literacy-based initiatives across content and grade levels that are grounded in research and assessment data to determine students' literacy levels and appropriate instructional supports as seen by a 3.5% increase in the number of students in the Class of 2020 reaching CUNY's standard for college readiness (a score of 75 on the ELA Regents exam), from 74% in 2017-2018 to 77.5% in June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? teachers 9/’18-6/’19 9/’18-6/’19 CCAA Staff (Teacher Teams, Classroom teachers, APs & Principal) CCAA Staff (Teacher Teams, Classroom teachers, APs & Principal) Working with MSQI and the DOE literacy initiative-Empowering Young Writers to implement reading and writing initiatives to support the school's focus on building literacy across grades and content areas teachers & students  Inter-visitations (peers): To observe strategies to improve teachers' use of literacy strategies and shared best practices   APs will engage in cycles of Observations focused on how are the collaborative cycles of inquiry being implemented/adapted particularly as it relates to the use of data?   Teachers will engage in the administration of periodic assessments such as DRP, and MOSLs to determine students' incremental progress. Scholarship reports, NY State Examination data, students' work, teacher created quantitative data and other anecdotal data in grade and content area team meetings and inquiry team will be shared during professional development cycles, grade and content meetings and will be used to determine students' progress,  Grade level and content teacher Teams will review samples of students work and MSQI reading groups following the administration of DRP to determine the most effective program for students   Periodic review of student data (cycles of inquiry):: scholarship reports, Regents results, middle school students data, and teachers qualitative data will inform teacher teams cycles of inquiry  Weekly Instructional Cabinet: Focused on normed observation feedback, learning walks -focused on Danielson 3B. The goal is to develop a common language Students Teacher Teams Teacher Teams 9/'18-6/'19 9/'18-6/'19 CCAA Staff 2018-19 CEP 18 of feedback, identify promising practices in order to allow teachers to share their promising practices. Teacher Teams  Teachers will maintain samples of students work in Teachers 9/’18-6/’19 Classroom Teachers, portfolios APs APs  Teachers will engage in ongoing inquiry on student quantitative and qualitative data  Teachers will focus on student feedback and assessments which will be shared at the end of each marking period and following the administration of each periodic assessment cycle 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers, PTA and CBO-Children's Aid Society: weekly workshops & meetings will engage families in what students are learning and how they can provide additional support. The CCAA Parent Coordinator will work with CBO-Children's Aid Society to provide workshops on topics around college, career readiness, literacy, literacy at CCAA, the Early College Initiative (ECI), Graduation Tracker, and College Orientation (grades 9-12), College Access for All and reading the high school transcript. The parent coordinator and guidance counselors will be the key personnel responsible for the oversight of this area of parent and student supports. Parents will be trained in Pupilpath with the middle school teachers having set a goal 75% parent usage. 2018-19 CEP 19  Parents and students will also be trained in the usage of technology of APPs such as Remind, Khan Academy, Delta Math and Kahoot classroom. Workshops will be provided by teachers and staff in the SUMA Family Room. (math teachers, teacher teams,) Academic Intervention Support Services: Tutoring and Saturday Academy will be provided for all students based on the following schedule: 6-8 Wednesday-Friday CAS Coordinated 9-12 Wednesday-Friday CCAA Coordinated Arts Monday-Friday CAS-CCNY Coordinated 6-12 Saturday Academy TBA Walk-throughs and instructional rounds based on the Danielson Rubric Framework will be conducted to ensure cohesion within instruction practices. The tenets of the Danielson Rubric Framework, especially around the areas of instruction and planning and engagement will be reviewed. Teachers will co-plan, engage in curriculum & unit planning, reviewing students' work and inter-visiting with colleagues to observe a plethora of practices such as the use of the Remind APP, Work Stations, Math Balls, and Harkness (not Socratic Seminar-deeper). 6 & 7th grade students will be programmed for up to 5 periods of a dedicated MSQI reading Period. 8 grade students will participate in LINC-reading to 2nd graders at PS 5. Students reading levels will be determined by their scores on the DRP (administered 3 times per year) which will inform their reading groups. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Collaborative learning cycles will be focused on learning and using different strategies to promote literacy across content areas. Middle school teachers will utilize MSQI to provide targeted reading instruction and to students in grades 6-8 and writing the new writing program offered by the DOE called Empowering Young Writers. Teachers who have demonstrated exemplar practices in these areas will be identified and asked to share their practices in collaborative cycles and teachers will not only be invited to inter-visit with them, but where necessary, mandated as a part of a professional development plan. Inter-visits will be logged and teachers will utilize the CCAA inter-visitation Protocol. All teachers at CCAA have been trained in the use of the Protocol. Professional development for teachers in literacy will be provided through the DOE, CUNY and teachers who have exhibited exemplar practices. Per session will be made available to teachers to work on promising practices. Teachers will also be covered (per diem) in order that they may inter-visit to observe promising practices at other schools. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 10 % of CCAA students will demonstrate progress in their reading, speaking, and writing skills. This will be measured by students' performance on the DRP reading assessments, their performance on NY State Middle School Examinations and their performance on other New York State Summative assessment examinations . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress monitoring will occur through classroom observations of teachers, review of students' work in teacher teams and in their performance on the February administration of the DRP assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? CCAA chooses to begin with the area of priority. The School Leadership Team continues to find the students responses to the question of "My teachers...notice when I am upset?" troubling. The data indicate that despite the work of CCAA's guidance and CAS' mental health clinic, students continue to be in a state of crisis. The priority is how can we better serve students: These are some areas that we have identified: 1. Share the above report with CAS and create systems to address the issues ( parent meetings, students and teacher workshops) 2. CCAA will take attendance during period 1. How can CCAAA ensure that every student is known by at least one student in the building? 3. How will CCAA ensure that its mandated students are receiving their mandated academic support services that will ensure their academic success Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will develop and implement effective social/emotional and academic supports including the use of UDL strategies that engage each student in taking ownership for their learning, as evidenced by a 3% increase in students with over 90% attendance, from 79.6% to 82.6%. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? CCAA will increase the number of celebrations held for students. For example, Principal Drysdale will increase the number of student activities she attends. Teachers/ 9/18-6/19 APs, CAS, CCAA Teachers, APs, Principal, PSO-CUNY teacher  Children' Aid Society will work with CCAA to ensure that Students 9/’18-6/’19 Teachers, School students who are taking college courses successfully completes those courses through the institution of social emotional initiatives such as students self-reflective assessments, mental health workshops and written student support plans. Parents Administrators, CAS  Students' attendance will be monitored through the addition of the CAASS system, the PC during lunch, and by the attendance team  Communication with parents/guardians will be Parents 9/’18-6/’19 Teachers, Parent strengthened particularly for parents of high school students and for students attending classes at the college. Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, School Administrators  Parents will be invited to Attendance meetings and PPT meetings to discuss ways of supporting students and developing intervention plans.  Parents will be taught to track students academic progress and daily attendance on Pupil Path. 9th grade students will be assigned a freshman Seminar class. The focus will be on time management, organization, and other skills needed for college readiness using the research based program Elevate.. Students 9/’18-6/’19 Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers, PTA leaders, CBO-Children's Aid Society will keep families informed of school activities (monthly meetings, celebrations, or a student's) via phone calls, backpacked flyers, emails and PupilPath. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CCAA's CBO- the Children's Aid Society, is funding a part-time social worker to work specifically with CCAA high school students, Per session for guidance Counselors and 1 teacher will be scheduled as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the number of students positive responses on the school's internal student survey from 70 in September 2018 to 77 in February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase in students' attendance at CCAA's and its after school arts programs that will be supervised by CBO-Children's Aid Society from 125 to 166. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the School Environment survey in the category of collaborative teachers, only 64% of the teachers at CCAA responded that they had opportunities to work collaboratively. despite the fact that common planning and teacher team is a part of the fabric of CCAA. In looking deeper at the survey, the SLT has concluded that the data there is a deeper issue. For example, 39% of the teachers reported that teachers at CCAA do not trust each other. In looking at the survey data that relates to teachers, there is a sense that there is a morale issue. To that end, we have turned to our Community Based Organization, Children's Aide Society who will be working with us to rebuild collaboration and trust among CCAA teachers and staff this school year in. Prior to the UFT contract that mandates professional development time for teachers, CCAA teachers met and planned during a common planning time. Teachers often cited this as a positive aspect of their CCAA experience. However, now that collaboration is mandated, and monetary resources for per session have become scarce, teachers are reporting that there is a lack of collaboration. CCAA has been working with its CBO-CAS to provide professional development workshops around the issues of collaboration and trust. In 2017, this professional development series culminated in a staff retreat. Despite the workshops and teachers reporting via a qualitative survey that we had worked more collaboratively in 2017, the School Environment Survey did not show these data. The updated web page for CCAA on Inside School notes that this is an issue among the staff. Given this, we will continue to focus a part of its collaborative learning in 2018-19+ on Section 3b of the Danielson Rubric in order to ensure that we are providing students with the rigorous instructions differentiation and other resources that will continue to ensure the success of all students including ENLs and SPEDs Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CCAA will work toward deepening teacher trust and collaboration in order to better meet students' academic needs, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of teachers reporting that there is trust among the staff from 58% in 2018 to 63% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?     development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Summer professional development and planning time will be available to teachers (DOE, school based) In six-week collaborative learning cycles the high school team team will focus its work on identifying the lowest third of students in grades 9-11 and working with their guidance counselor: Review data such as 1. Scholarship Reports 2. Transcripts 3. Graduations tracker (in STARS) Teachers 7/’18-6/’19 High School Teacher teams & Administrators  Attendance data and determine strategies to support their academic learning. The group will also be responsible for assessing the success of the interventions and for determining alternative plans.  The college advisor, AP, and CCNY-CCAA liaison will meet Teachers with parents/guardians and "graduating" senior of the class of 2019 three times during 2018-2019 and the graduating class of 2020 individually at least once during the school to ensure that the students are on track for graduating or to develop an action plan for students who are in danger of not graduating with their respective cohort. Subject area teachers will be invited to the meetings and asked for their input as a part of the collaborative process Parents Teachers  College advisor, AP, CCNY-CCAA liaison October 2018, & January 2019, April 2019  Parent workshops will be held for high school parents Teachers 8/'18-6/'19 Teachers, Parent (grades 9-12) throughout the year to advise them of the their child's progress towards graduation, and the college process (college fairs @ CCAA, FASFA night at CCAA, & College Week). Parents will be taught how to track Parents Coordinator, School Administrators & CCNY-CCAA liaiso, CBO -CAS 2018-19 CEP 26  students academic progress and attendance on Pupil Path.  CCAA AP assigned to CCNY and the CCNY Liaisan will hold workshops to keep teachers informed of the early college program and the students' progress in the college program while the guidance counselors will keep the staff informed of students' academic progress via PPT/KidTalk, and workshops around guidance issues Report cards will be mailed to parents three times per semester. AIS programs will be offered to students who are in danger of failing or not being promoted: Saturday Academy, Academic Support Center (ASC) will be available to students who are in danger of falling behind on their high school credits, tutoring. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement students 9/’18-6/’19 Teachers, Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator, ENL teachers, PTA, CBO-Children's Aid Society will coordinate weekly and Monthly workshops & meetings, These activities will include the schools annual Family Health Day, Welcome Back to School Night, Dads Take Your Child to School and in the spring, a parents' retreat which will be held at Wagon Road, the Children's Aid Camp located in Chappaqua, NY. Workshops on topics such as such as Accessing PupilPath/Skedula, Passos, social-emotional wellness and supporting learners at home. Parent engagement activities will be facilitated by teachers, guidance counselors, assistant principals, ENL teachers and members of the Children's Aid Society or their affiliates. Parents will be informed of all activities through email, phone messages and fliers. All communication will be in both English and Spanish. CCAA staff are available to meet with parents as needed. This include the parent coordinator, guidance counselors and teachers. Two of CCAA's assistant principals are bilingual as are many teachers. However, translation services for families who do not Spanish or English is provided through the DOE. Although CCAA holds four yearly parent-teacher conferences, parents are informed of their child's academic progress via scheduled PPT/KidTalk with teachers. These meetings are coordinated by the guidance counselor and involves the grade teams meeting with families to determine how best to support struggling learners and likewise to acknowledge academic progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To continue to build trust and collaboration among staff CCAA will engage the following supports : CCAA's CBO-Children's Aid Society will provide professional development along with ECI, CUNY, and the AFFINITY Support Team. Professional Development will also be provided through a plethora of organizations such as MSQI, PASSWORD, Teachers College-Technology Team, and teachers from CCAA No Per session funds are needed 2018-19 CEP 27  Children's Aid Society provides its services as a part of its role as the community based organization Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students credit accumulation will increase by 1.4% from 84.6 to 85%. In January 2019, CCAA will take the pulse of the staff regarding their view of trust and collaboration at CCAA. This will be assessed via a schoolwide staff survey the data of which will be analysed and discussed with the staff as a part of the schools 80 minute Monday PD in February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship reports, students participation in alternative pathways to graduation, period assessment data, and graduation tracker, and a school based teacher survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Danielson Framework for teaching and the Framework for Great Schools informs the professional practice of teachers at CCAA. CCAA's strength is in its teacher teams. Teacher team work especially in the area of curriculum planning has been an integral part of the fabric of CCAA since its inception in 2005. CCAA teachers work in professional development teams and teacher teams to learn and follow the tenets outlined in both frameworks. This focus has resulted in student success on NYS examinations. For example, 94% of 8th grade students who sat for the June 2018 Regents Examination in Algebra were successful. In fact, overall, in 2018, CCAA added English as a 4th Regents that students in the 8th grade may opt to complete. As a result of this choice, 50% of the students in the 8th grades completed four Regents Examinations in June 2018 and earned up to eight high school credits. The achievement of our 9th graders are equalling impressive: 94% of the 9th grade passed the New York State Regents Examination in Global History and Geography and 94% passed the New York State Regents Examination in English. We anticipate that given these data that the graduating classes of 2022 and 2023 will complete the 4+1 graduating requirements by the end of the 10 and 9th grade respectively. Our success also extends to our students taking courses at CCNY, 29% of the graduating class of 2018 completed over 60 college credits. As a staff we used to be concerned about the academic goals our SPEDS and ENL students; specifically how could we ensure that they were also making the gains equivalent to our general education students in terms of meeting credit and Regents requirements as well as early college credits. However, the data show that like our general education students, speds and ENL students are graduating with Regents diplomas and are completing college courses. Yet despite having a consistent 99% graduation rate, students who complete Regents Examinations while in the 8th grade, and students who complete above the 60 college course goal at CCNY, the School Environment Survey results continue to challenges the level of rigor @ CCAA.. Noting the correlation between rigorous instruction and student engagement (Domain 3C). CCAA will focus its observation on student engagement. based on teacher's Advance selection during their initial planning conferences (IPCs), administrators will conduct formal and informal observations for each teacher using the Danielson Framework and specific identified "look fors" as a guide resulting in actionable verbal and written feedback with next steps. continual reflection and revision of practice. These assessments and feedback will inform the schools progress monitoring of students' academic performance and inform the school's academic intervention services. Besides professional development, teachers will also receive resource support in the planning and preparation via: 1. Formatted lesson plan templates with management needs for all IEP students 2. Laminated copies of Webb's Depth of Knowledge planning chart and H.O.T. Questions 3. Daily Assessment Record: to maintain daily record of students' progress in all classes 2018-19 CEP 29  4. Professional development notebook to record notes and other information related to CCAA cycles of inquiry 5. Grade level teams will focus on cycles of inquiry while content area teams will focus on curriculum mapping using Rubicon Atlas. 6. Review of formative and summative assessment data at the end of each marking period 7. Review of data such as scholarship reports, student work, and effective literacy strategies Teacher feedback indicated that they would desire greater administrative presence and leadership in professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leaders will facilitate professional development workshops that will inform teacher practice, incorporating cycles of collaborative inquiry opportunities and effective feedback from observations, as evidenced by an increase in positive teacher feedback on professional development by administrators on the School Survey from 39% to 43%. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaborative inquiry cycles will be planned by the professional development committee that is overseen by the instructional cabinet. CCAA’s instructional focus and the Framework for Great Schools will be the tools used to plan professional development around grade level teams cycles of inquiry and content area focus on curriculum planning.. The focus of this year's work will be feedback and assessment. CCAA teachers, staff and administrator will focus on the feedback are given. For example, how will students know when they are doing well? Will they engage in self assessment? What will it look like? What will be the impact of feedback on students outcome? Cycles inquiry will focus on lesson studies, differentiation strategies, effective CFUs and creating effective groups. The Danielson Framework will inform teacher practices within their lesson plans with specific strategies to meet the needs of students in need of additional supports including ENLs and SPEDs. All lesson plans for teachers of SPEDs students will contain students' management from the IEPs in order to engage in effective planning. CCAA will also participate in the ICT Lab-site professional development support initiative provided by Affinity CUNY/UA which will focus on instructional supports for SPEDS students. The instructional cabinet will establish a bi-weekly instructional rounds cycle in order to ensure that the cabinet is normed. Melissa Mejias, PDEC, Michael Steele, Program Officer and Charles Amundsen from CUNY will lead some of the instructional/norming rounds. A monthly inter-visitation schedule will be established to allow new teachers to inter-visit with grade level and content team leaders and other teachers who have been identified as having "a promising practice," to observe. Teachers will be encouraged to inter-visit with teachers from other schools both inside and outside the Salome Urena Campus. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/’18-6/’19 Teachers & School Administrators Teacher 9/’18-6/’19 Teachers & Administrators Affinity CUNY/UA Admins 9/'18-6/'19 Administrators Teachers 9/18-6/'19 Administrators, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers, PTA, CBO-Children's Aid Society: A monthly series of workshops will be planned to inform parents of the Danielson Framework and The Framework for Great Schools. These workshops will be facilitated by staff from CCAA and the parent coordinator. Parents will be informed of all meeting via a plethora of resources including flyers, messenger, telephone calls. All communication will be in both Spanish and English. Daily classes will be held in the SUMA Room and evening classes will be held via CCAA and the PTA. Classes will be facilitated by teachers, administrators and staff from CCAA, and CAS. Topics will include: Talking to your teens, Take your student to school, and cooking. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The support of the Superintendent's Office, the Early College Initiative (ECI) and CUNY Per session for planning meetings (for teachers)= 6hrs of per session for 6 teachers=$1,722.20 Absence coverage for teachers to inter-visit with other teachers and schools within the Affinity Network=available through absence coverage Per session for 6 Teachers to participate in workshops around the Danielson Framework and curriculum mapping using the Atlas Rubicon software=6hrs of per session for 6 teachers= $1, 722.20 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, CCAA.'s instructional cabinet will complete 80% of its tiered observation reports in Advance. By June 1, 2019 CCAA's will complete its observation reports in Advance 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation data, Curriculum maps, Detailed lesson plans, Inter-visitation logs, Walk-throughs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. CCAA has followed the traditional model of parent-teacher conferences. Our parents typically attend all parent teacher conferences. In fact, there is an average attendance rate of 85%. Inherent in our parent-teacher conferences is the knowledge that apart from talking with teachers, families will also receive of information from our CBO-Children's Aid Society, our Parent-Coordinator, the PTA and other members of the community. The college liaison, senior assistant principal and college counselor work with the parents of seniors to ensure that they are on track for graduation and, if not, to development actionable plans. The impact of this focused attention to student academic achievement is evidenced by CCAA 99% graduation. Families are also able to ask for assistance with non-scholastic matters such as with immigration, translation of personal items, Typically the student is with the parent but is passive; In the fall of 2016, CCAA's middle school teachers began to include students in these conferences and the May 2017 CCAA's parent teacher conferences were wholly led by students. In 2018-2019 CCAA will fully adopt student-led conferences as its model of parent teacher conferences. The view is that, the students, as the primary stake holder, should speak for themselves, should work with their teachers to plan/develop goals for their success and should be able to articulate how their plans to achieve said success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, working with the CBO Children's Aid, CCAA will provide social-emotional supports--including workshops, a retreat, and electronic distribution of information--that will increase family participation in school as evidenced by an increase in parents' survey responses from 83% to 88%. 2018-19 CEP 34 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work in grade level teams to develop protocols for conducting student led conferences Students teachers 9/'18-6/'19 Teachers 1. The Work around student led conferences will be supported by Michael Steele of ECI, CUNY. 2. Students will be trained in the protocols to conduct parent-conferences. 3. Translators for student led conferences will be provided by Children's Aid SocietyParent Coordinator, Teachers, AdministratorsParent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators Students will lead conferences with their parents Parents & Student 9/'18-6/'19 Translators for student led conferences will be provided by Children's Aid Society Prepare parents structure and dialogue through workshops on student led conferences that are coordinated by Children's Aid Society which will also provide translation services for parents. Parents 9/’18-6/’19 Parent Coordinator PTA & CBO 2018-19 CEP 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid Society, City College of New York, CUNY Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Support from CBO-Children’s Aid Teachers will continue to create protocols for student led conferences in their grade level team meetings. No additional resources are needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 2 student led conferences will be held during PT conferences (September and November) across grades 6-11 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CCAA Staff will attend training for teachers and students. Feedback from students and teachers regarding their expectations for conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State ELAtest scores, class performance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) MSQI Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group & tutoring DRP MOSL Junior Great Books Scholastic Mathematics Science State math test scores, class performance Focus-Core Math, Big Ideas Math, Math Tools Class performance Regents Prep Small Group and Tutoring Tutoring Social Studies Class performance Regents Prep Tutoring MOSL Teacher and student reports Counseling 1-to-1, small group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day, Before, after school and Saturdays During the School Day, Before, after school and Saturdays During the School Day, Before, after school and Saturdays During the School Day, Before, after school and Saturdays During the School Day 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 52 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. metro cards,, schools supplies, counseling, glasses(Helen Keller), Dental & Mental health support services via Children's Aid Society (CCAA's Community Based Organization) , after school tutoring, lap tops. uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 52 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38 metro cards, school supplies, counseling, glasses (Helen Keller), Dental and Mental health support services via Children's Aid Society (CCAA's Community Based Organization), after school tutoring 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3,800 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. CCAA administrators regularly pursue teaching candidates through all avenues, including hiring fairs, resume reviews, teacher finder located on the NYC Department of Education website and professional recommendations from colleagues and staff. One favorite source for finding effective teachers is through our relationship with the City College of New York, CUNY. CCAA serves as a mentor site for fieldworkers and student teachers. This affords us the unique opportunity to observe potential candidates over time and to then extend an offer should a position becomes available. All teachers are programmed to teach in their license area. Teachers make their options known in the Spring by completing a A Preference Sheet. When new teachers arrive in the school, they are welcomed with warm applause by current staff, enjoy a welcome breakfast and other celebrations, are paired with a mentor from the returning faculty. All teachers participate in high-quality collaborative learning activities that are planned by a committee composed of administrators and teachers, including two who have served as Teacher Leaders. CCAA draws on its partnership with the CUNY Affinity Group to deliver PD. Within the math and science departments, colleagues have encouraged one another to apply for the Math for America program, which has now accepted five faculty members. We have also developed relationships with PD organizations such as Theater Development Fund, Carnegie Hall’s Weill Music Institute, Julliard Educational Outreach, and Facing History and Ourselves. Schoolwide professional development is offered through CUNY AFFINITY, ECI, MSQI, DOE writing initiative and Math for America 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). CCAA provides the following forms of Collaborative Learning which is guided under the umbrella of college, career and citizenship readiness:  Teacher teams-grade, content, literacy, professional development, teacher leaders, attendance, special education, The topics are diverse and targeted to meet the learning needs of all students. Some topics: 2018-19 CEP 40  Effective strategies for teaching ELLs Effective ICT Models Checks for Understanding (CFU) Using Webb's Depth of Knowledge Chart to differentiate instruction Project Basted Learning: Interactive Notebook, workstations How to teach teacher students to set smart Goals Using data to support students learning Talking so that students hear you student self-assessment integrating technology Effective literacy strategies Effective writing strategies  Instructional leaders-CUNY  Inter-visitations-classroom, other schools  Co-planning for ICT classes/Ells School based mentoring   Buddy teacher   grade teams content teams Para-professionals are trained by the IEP team on SESIS and strategies to support students based on their type of need. Paraprofessionals meet as a part of the IEP each morning.  Principal and Administrators Norming w/TDEK(from Superintendent Walsh's office) Instructional Rounds- (CUNY~Weekly) Principals Meeting (With Fred Walsh, Superintendent and Alan Dichter (CUNY) Cabinet Meeting-webinars 2018-19 CEP 41  Instructional Leaders-APs Inter-visitations with other principal/schools Other organizations such as Teachers college Online programs such as webinars offered through Google Classroom Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in teacher teams and grade level teams to determine what types of formative assessments should be administered to students. It was determined that CCAA will administer the MOSL, New York State Periodic Assessments in Mathematics and STARS Diagnostic that are used to determine students’ math and reading levels. Professional development activities were then focused on: ● Using assessments to inform teaching practices (Using data to create students' groups, using data to creating assignment for students, using data to determine baseline for students) What is the Data saying? ● Evaluating students’ work 2018-19 CEP 42  ● Creating effective teacher based assessments ● Skills based learning: What do students need to know and be able to do (at different grade level in each content area) Academic and content literacy CCAA will also administer the DRP to students in grades 6-8 as a part of its literacy program. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4, 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 5B 4, 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 366,371. 0 12,366.00 0 3,729,482 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 43  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. City College Academy of the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students City College Academy of the Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community 2018-19 CEP 45  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.   In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator and other dedicated staff, including members of our CBO, the Children’s Aid Society, will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; understanding the Common Core; and navigating the high school and college admissions processes;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Quality Snapshot and Guide, Quality Review Report, School Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help, coordinated by the Parent Coordinator and facilitated with the aid of the Children’s Aid Society;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 46   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing news via Pupil Path and regular printed notices to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) City College Academy of the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  providing parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, report cards will be distributed six times a year and student Promotion in Doubt letters will be sent home a minimum of twice a year and parents will receive individual reports on academic performance of students on State assessments; training parents in all pertinent information needed to access PupilPath in order that they may track their child’s academic performance.  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  provide an environment conducive for study;  make sure that homework is completed;  talk with my child about his/her academic and extracurricular activities. III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn.  Come to school prepared to learn with all the materials and tools of learning-pens, pencils, books, homework, etc.:  Participate in classroom and school-wide activities:   Give to my parents/guardians all notices and information I receive at school. Follow the school’s dress code: 2018-19 CEP 50 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Rationale: Begin description here: · CCAA is an early college 6-12 secondary school. As such, it is important to acknowledge that college readiness is at the core of our practice. ELLs are included in and participate in all school programs, after school programs, and Saturday Academy. With an Academic Support Center and after-school/one-on-one tutoring, ELLs are given access to content area programs and helps keep the ELL students up to speed with the general education students. There are activities that are provided for all students, and ELL students are active participants, that includes Debate Team, Drama Club, Environmental Awareness Club, Skittles (LGBTQ) Club, music lessons, and sports (basketball, softball, track). Students are also given the opportunity to create their own after-school programs and clubs with teacher support. One-on-one tutoring is provided for all ELL subgroups during lunch and after school with both the ESL and content area teachers. Through the various different activities, instructional strategies are used to make the activity comprehensible to foster language development, including: choral reading and responses, gallery walks, key sentence frames, contextualized directions, modeling academic language, Think-Pair-Share, Think-Write-Pair-Share, graphic organizers, shared reading, cloze sentences with word banks, anticipation guides, prompting academic language usage, collaborative dialogue, guided reading, signal words, guided reading, Jigsaw reading, varied presentation formats, rubrics, report frames, video observation guides, structured debates with graphic organizers and outlines, word walls, and reciprocal teaching · The different subgroups include newcomers, developing, long term, and former ENLs. The grade levels include 6-12. · Schedule and duration: The after school program will begin in November 12, 2018 and last through May 31, 2019 on Wednesday through Friday from 2:35-3:35pm Saturday Academy will begin on December 1, 2018 and last through June 1, 2019 for 15 Saturdays, from 9:00am to 12pm, in order to provide support for Regents and NYSESLAT preparation. · only language of instruction. · · There are 3 ENL Teachers. There is 1 English Teacher. · The types of materials include Smart Boards, projectors, student laptops, portfolios, teacher-student journals, classroom libraries with student-chosen texts, graphic organizers, Google Drive, Closed Captioning, Khan Academy, flash cards, picture and text bilingual dictionaries, Google Translate, Prezi, Recording applications, flash drives, pronunciation texts, Skedula, and Ted-Ed. Language of instruction:&nbsp;CCAA&nbsp;is an ENL program,&nbsp;English is the Subgroups/grade levels: # and types of certified teachers: Types&nbsp;of materials: 2018-19 CEP 52  Rationale:&nbsp; rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · The professional development plan for ELL personnel will focus on how to use data from the NYSESLAT and the DRP assessments to inform student groupings during CCAA's targeted reading period and content area classes. This year, CCAA will be implementing a new reading program through the DOE. An integral part of the reading program is 15 sessions of school based professional development support that is focused on the use of assessment data (DRP) and effective reading strategies suchas a NEWS ELA to support students across content area. Data training and workshops on effective reading strategies will be provided by an assigned coach from the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). Other professional development around the use of data will be provided by CUNY-AFFINITY personnel and school based teacher leaders, ELL personnel will turnkey what they learned for the rest of the staff, non-ELL personnel. · ESL certified teachers, will provide a professional workshop for teachers on effective teaching strategies for ELLs · Beginning in September, the specified teachers will proactively look for and attend programs to support their instruction to last through the end of the school-year. · The training and workshops chosen will focus on valuing student's native language and culture, pedagogical strategies for content areas with regard to push-in and pull-out models, using various forms of data to drive instruction. · The ESL program coordinator is part of the ELL Advisory Group with Affinity Group that meets with ESL experts and published authors to discuss and implement or pilot ESL strategies. Additionally, the ESL program coordinator is a founding member LAC Advisory Board to ensure ESL students and parents receive the language services they need. CCAA follows the mandate to provide professional development ELL-specific workshops annually by being on various newsletters in the industry including the "News & Opportunities" from the Division of ELLs. Teachers to receive training: Schedule/duration: Topics to be covered: Name of provider:&nbsp; Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · rationale schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · · topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Rationale:&nbsp; Begin description here: · We provide individual meetings both at the beginning of the year once the NYSESLAT results have been received and at the end of the year. In order to share information from all the content areas, the ESL teachers meet with and receive emails from the content area teachers that describe how the ESL students are doing in their class. In collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and PTA, workshops and meetings are held throughout the year and ESL parents are encouraged to attend through mail, phone and emails. CCAA invites parents to many activities during the school year. Every year, the music department puts on two shows and invites parents. The drama department puts on two plays and parents are invited, and many attend to come support CCAA students. Workshops are held during and after school by the school's community based organization, Children's Aid Society that are focused on providing parents with the skills to support ELLs. These include classes such as: navigating the DOE website; helping students to read; ESL instruction for adults; talking to teens; and preparing students for examinations. Parents are also provided access to teachers and grades through PupilPath. Via this computer system, parents can track their child's academic progress, including attendance, daily and communicate with teachers as needed . CCAA also has an open door policy allowing parents access to school personnel and staff without the need for appointments. The school has three guidance counselors who work with teachers and parents to provide interventions when needed.. · The individual meetings will take place in September/October, and the end of year meetings will take place in May/June. · In these meetings, parents meet with all three ESL teachers and guidance counselor to share with them their students progress and the language proficiency their child is currently. · Language and Interpretation Unit and Affinity · ELL parents are in touch with teachers through Skedula, email, mail, and phone, using the Translation & Interpretation services when needed. The ESL program coordinator will send a monthly ESL newsletter informing the parents about any school news and opportunities for them to get involved in the school. How parents will be notified of these activities: Name of provider:&nbsp; Schedule/duration: Topics to be covered: Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 2018-19 CEP 54 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 1. 2. Per session Per diem Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name City College Academy of the Arts Borough Manhattan School Number 293 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Burnedette Drysdale Assistant Principal Alrye Osborne Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dennis Mihalsky Teacher/Subject Area Jenna Young/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Carol Polen/S.S. Related-Service Provider Alethea Webster Superintendent Fred Walsh Coach School Counselor Amanda Rios Parent Parent Coordinator Manuela Ceballos Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) Joseph Kinney/AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 609 2018-19 CEP 56 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? - Teachers assess students based on their reading fluency and comprehension through a variety of assessment tools: anecdotal records, running records, reading records, questioning, and formal teacher-created quizzes and tests. - In all content areas, other formative assessments that are used include journals and portfolios, small group discussions, varied presentation formats, think-pair-share, reciprocal teaching, peer-to-peer feedback, self-evaluations, student-created rubrics with glows and grows 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? - The structures in place to support instruction include shared reading, sentence frames, cloze passages, learning logs, "Jigsaw" reading, graphic organizers for note-taking, guiding questions, and collaborative dialogue and questioning - In various content areas, ESL teachers provide support in the classroom where needed and collaborate with the content area 2018-19 CEP 57  teacher to provide necessary and appropriate supports - ESL teachers lead PDs to share new and effective methodology to use within the classroom throughout the year 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? - The summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments in place include the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, MOSLs, end-of-chapter/unit exams, end-of-term exams, student progress reports, and periodic assessments for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? - The structures in place to address interventions include after-school tutoring for various content areas, Saturday Academy for test preparation, Academic Support Center for homework help, and an Inquiry Team focused on ESL students struggling in core content areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] - Not applicable based on grade-level 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. - Based on our EDAT, the outcome assessments used to inform ELL programs include NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments, and Regents data 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? - The structures in place in order to make adjustments to our programs include varied push-in and pull-out services, and an Inquiry Team focused on ESL students Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. - Our freestanding ENL program instruction is delivered through standalone ENL classes and push-in or pull-out services, depending on the individual students' needs. - These are implemented based on the NYSESLAT scores and correspond to their mandatory instructional minutes per their proficiency level. - Grades 9-12 receive both standalone ENL classes, focusing on all four modalities with a concentration on speaking and writing modalities, and push-in services in ELA and social studies. The students are grouped ungraded and heterogeneous both in standalone and push-in classes. - Grades 6-8 receive both standalone ENL classes, focusing on reading and writing, and push-in services in science, ELA and social studies. The students are grouped by block and heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable based on school's program c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable based on school's program 2018-19 CEP 58  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? - To ensure that the explicit ENL, ELA and HLA Instructional mandated minutes are delivered, students have either both standalone and push-in ENL services or just push-in services, depending on their proficiency level. Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level students receive both standalone ENL classes and push-in services into one of the core content areas. Expanding and Commanding (for two years) students receive push-in services into one of the core content area subjects. - All English Language Learners are exposed to explicit ELA instruction from a licensed ELA teacher daily with an emphasis on language acquisition and comprehension, and academic rigor. - In all the content area classes, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used. - In the ENL standalone classes, students are encouraged to use their native language to explain information with their peers and share out the information in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. - Being that CCAA is an ENL program, English is the only language of instruction throughout all core content classes. - Instructional strategies, depending on the student's English proficiency, used to make the content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of CCLS include: choral reading and responses, gallery walks, key sentence frames, contextualized directions, modeling academic language, Think-Pair-Share, Think-Write-Pair-Share, graphic organizers, shared reading, cloze sentences with word banks, anticipation guides, prompting academic language usage, collaborative dialogue, guided reading, signal words, guided reading, Jigsaw reading, varied presentation formats, rubrics, report frames, video observation guides, structured debates with graphic organizers and outlines, word walls, and reciprocal teaching - CCAA is a project-based curriculum for all content areas. Through this structure, students are given the tools, the deadlines, the resources, the support, and the requirements necessary to development varied presentations and outcomes that require all students to develop their writing, listening, reading, and speaking skills through various scaffolds aforementioned that develop their language while meeting the demands of CCLS. - Push-in and pull-out services are provided in the core content areas by which the lessons are made appropriate and accessible for the ENL students through the collaboration of the content and ENL teachers. Through the push-in model, the ENL students are integrated with the general education students and thrive in this environment. The pull-out method is only used when content knowledge and academic language need to be reinforced, as determined by the ENL teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? - When new students come into the country or NYC public schools and they are identified as ELLs and their HLIS specifies Spanish, they are given the Spanish LAB. This gives the ESL teacher a baseline and understanding of their literacy and learning background and ability. - Students also participate in activities that native language is encouraged, such as, script writing and adaptations, improvisations, readings, and cultural projects. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: Should CCAA receive SIFE students, instructional support will focus on providing a maximum level of English language instruction that will support the student's English language acquisition. These students will be placed in a daily stand-alone ENL class in order to focus on their language development supporting all modalities, to provide learning strategies to be used in content area classes, and to build a supportive environment during their transition. Additionally, these students will receive push-in and pull-out services in core content areas and will be targeted for Saturday Academy and Academic Support Center. 2018-19 CEP 59  b. Newcomers: The plan for newcomers mirrors the one outlined for SIFE students. Based on the four modalities of the NYSITELL, newcomers will receive instruction with emphasis on language acquisition and literacy in standalone ENL classes. Additionally, we will focus on connecting language acquisition to the other content areas including social studies and science through push-in and pull-out services. Newcomers language acquisition will also be enhanced through classroom libraries that provide age and level appropriate texts in both their native language as well as English. c. Developing: The plan for developing ENL students will depend on their English language proficiency (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding). For each proficiency level, there will be a focus on strengthening their academic language and more integration with general education students. The main focus will be for ELLs to receive content-driven instruction, using ESL methodologies through push-in and pull-out services, so students can have meaningful interactions with the content. d. Long Term: For long term ELLs, a variety of programs and interventions will be in place. These include push-in and pull-out services, stand-alone ENL classes, Academic Support Center, Saturday Academy, after-school tutoring and one-on-one support. The driving force behind differentiating for long term ELLs is the data gained from their NYSESLAT scores by modality as well as specific content strengths and weaknesses. By analyzing the data, we focus specific scaffolds and supports on their weaknesses and further strengthen their strengths. e. Former ELLs: Ongoing support for students identified as Commanding on the NYSESLAT, will be provided and these students will be informed of their continued accommodations and support for the next two years. These students will receive ENL services through push-in, and as needed, pull-out. They will also receive all testing accommodations they are entitled to and have direct access to all ENL teachers as they need in order to make their transition as a fully bilingual student seamless and effective. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? - Students with special needs will receive the services as mandated per their IEP. This will include pull-out and push-in ESL instruction, academic intervention programs such as peer-tutoring, and counseling. Instructional strategies include extensive vocabulary support and various visual aids. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? - We allow flexible scheduling with multiple services for students, which includes ICT, general education, SETSS, and Related Services. This allows students to attend general education classes with their peers along with classes that provide support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. - In the Middle School, there is a reading class in the morning for all students. The ELLs for 6 and 7th grade are together in a stand-alone reading class, with a strong focus on their reading comprehension. This class is in English with their Home Language encouraged for peer discussions, and students that are in this class include developing and former ELLs. - In the High School, there is an Academic Support Center for after school support in all core content areas. This includes developing ELL and ELL-SWDs. In this support center, students have multiple teachers to help with a core content area of their choice. - Push-in and pull-out services are used for ELA, Social Studies and Science with developing ELLs, former ELLs, and Long-Term ELLs. The ESL teacher works with the content area to develop lessons that will meet the needs of the ELLs in the classroom. This will include bilingual dictionaries, graphic organizers specifically for ELLs, explicit vocabulary review, and extra support during the lesson from the ESL teacher. - Testing accommodations are provided for all ELLs in their content area classes as well as state tests. Administration and the ESL teachers work together to ensure the testing accommodations are met for all their exams. - One-on-one tutoring is provided for all ELL subgroups during lunch and after school with both the ESL and content area 2018-19 CEP 60  teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? - New programs and improvements being considered for the upcoming school year include access to more technology, a wider range of elective courses and after-school clubs, and implementation of more multicultural literature. - Teacher-led PDs by ENL and Special Education teachers are being considered to support content area teachers' instruction and knowledge of the different student populations. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable to our school 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. - ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and are encouraged to join after school programs. With an Academic Support Center, Saturday Academy and after-school/one-on-one tutoring, ELLs are given access to content area programs and helps keep the ELL students up to speed with the general education students. - There are extracurricular activities that are provided for all students, and ELL students are provided access to, that includes Debate Team, Drama Club, music lessons, sports (basketball, softball, track). Each of these after-school programs includes ELL students (both developing and former). - Students are also given the opportunity to create their own after-school programs and clubs with teacher support. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. - Instructional materials include: smart boards, projectors, student laptops, portfolios, teacher-student journals, classroom libraries with student-chosen texts, graphic organizers, Google Drive, Closed Captioning, Khan Academy, flash cards, picture and text bilingual dictionaries, Google Translate, Prezi, Recording applications, flash drives, pronunciation texts, Skedula, and Ted-Ed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? - In all the content area classes, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are used. - In the ENL standalone classes, students are encouraged to use their native language to explain information with their peers and share out the information in English. - CCAA is strictly ESL, so TBE and DL programs are not offered here. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. - Through collaborative meetings with content area teachers, Special Education teachers, and ESL teachers, we ensure that all students are receiving the necessary services and resources appropriate for their age, grade-level, and English Proficiency level. - For each ELL subgroup, they are given the appropriate hours with the ESL teacher to ensure they can access grade-level texts with the necessary resources being used by the ESL teacher. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? - We share the building with two other schools and share the library, cafeteria, gym, nurses, school psychology, and social workers. In order for each school's ELLs' needs are met, we plan different times for each school to be able to access each resource. - The building also shares space with Children's Aid Society, which provides critical services to children and families, like after-school and weekend programs, arts, health and wellness, and youth development. - Through coordination and collaboration, the ELL students have access to all of these services and resources, as needed, so that their academic, linguistic, and socioemotional needs are met. 2018-19 CEP 61  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). - The guidance counselors assist all new students with transitioning into the school, while student leaders give tours and make introductions between new students and staff. - School leaders make the new student feel welcomed into our school by introducing her/him to peers and checking in with them regularly to make sure their transition is successful. - In classes, new ELLs are given a "buddy" to help them transition into the school's environment and learn the expectations of the class and school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? - The language electives that are offered to ELLs include Spanish, Hebrew, and Arabic. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable based on school's program Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? - The professional development plan for ELL personnel will focus on using data from the NYSESLAT to inform student groupings and individual needs within their content area classes. Through outside training and workshops, ELL personnel will turn key what they learned for the rest of the staff, non-ELL personnel. - The training and workshops chosen will focus on valuing student's native language and culture, pedagogical strategies for content areas with regard to push-in and pull-out models, using various forms of data to drive instruction. - The ESL program coordinator is part of the ELL Advisory Group with Affinity Group that meets with ESL experts and published authors to discuss and implement or pilot ESL strategies. Additionally, the ESL program coordinator is a founding member LAC Advisory Board to ensure ESL students and parents receive the language services they need. - Throughout the week, ESL teachers attend grade level meetings and content area meetings to provide professional development to content area teachers, reflect on teaching practices, align curriculum with Common Core Learning Standards, and to address the needs of ELLs within the grade levels and content areas. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. - CCAA follows the mandate to provide professional development ELL-specific workshops annually by being on various newsletters in the industry including the "News & Opportunities" from the Division of ELLs. - These hours are recorded through keeping the agendas from the professional development session. 2018-19 CEP 62  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? - We provide the annual individual meetings both at the beginning of the year once the NYSESLAT results have been received and at the end of the year. - In these meetings, parents meet with all three ESL teachers and guidance counselor to share with them their students progress and the language proficiency their child is currently. - In order to share information from all the content areas, the ESL teachers meet with and receive emails from the content area teachers that describe how the ESL students are doing in their class. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. - In collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and PTA, workshops and meetings are held throughout the year and ESL parents are encouraged to attend through mail, phone and emails. - ELL parents are in touch with teachers through Skedula, email and phone, using the Translation & Interpretation services when needed. - CCAA invites parents to many activities during the school year. Every year, the music department puts on two shows and invites parents. The drama department puts on two plays and parents are invited and many attend to come support CCAA students. - In the coming school year, the ESL program coordinator will send a monthly ESL newsletter informing the parents about any school news and opportunities for them to get involved in the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. CCAA has a drama department that encourages ELLs to get involved in the school's community, while strengthening their language skills. Many ELLs partake in the drama after-school club in the following areas, performance, set-design, costume design, backstage, and admissions. ELLs develop strong social language by being involved in this program. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Burnedette Drysdale, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: City College Academy of the Ar School DBN: 06M293 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Burnedette Drysdale Title Principal Alrye Osborne Assistant Principal Manuela Ceballos Parent Coordinator Dennis Mihalsky ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Carol Polen/SS Teacher/Subject Area Jenna Young/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Amanda Rios School Counselor Fred Walsh Alice Cohen Alethea Webster Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Joseph Kinney Other Assistant Principal Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M293 School Name: City College Academy of the Arts Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dennis Mihalsky ESL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. - The Home Language Survey (HLIS) - RAPL report from ATS - The Emergency Contact Card collected at the beginning of each year - In-class surveys - Parent-Teacher meetings and conferences 2018-19 CEP 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English French Bengali Seri Russian Urdu Ukrainian Arabic Chinese Mandingo 487 246 6 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 65% 33% .8% .004% .001% .001% .001% .001% .003% .001% .001% 487 246 6 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 65% 33.% .8% .004% .001% .001% .001% .001% .003% .001% .001% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Sept/Nov/Mar/May ELLs Entitlement Letters Parent Curriculum Night Sept Sept Letters from school leadership and staff Throughout the year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE Intranet templates for covered languages; school staff, personnel or T&I services for non-covered languages DOE intranet templates DOE intranet templates for covered languages; school staff, personnel or T&I services for non-covered languages DOE intranet templates or T&I unit for covered languages; school staff, 2018-19 CEP 67  personnel or vendors for non-covered languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences Sept/Nov/Mar/May Curriculum Night Sept Family Nights/PTA meetings Throughout the year Initial ELLs Parent Orientation Meetings Sept/Nov interpretation service(s)? Bi-lingual school staff and over-the-phone services Bi-lingual school staff and over-the-phone services Bi-lingual school staff and over-the-phone services Bi-lingual school staff and over-the-phone services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. - Automated phone calls in different languages - Phone calls from bi-lingual school personnel - Phone calls through over-the-phone services Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. - Professional Development by the school LAC and ESL teachers at the beginning and middle of the school year Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 68  - Translates signage - Letters/emails/newsletters to parents - Parent's Night Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? LAC and other school personnel will create a LEP parents survey to assess the effectiveness of the services at the end of various meetings. The effeectiveness of the services will also be assessed through follow-up discussions with the parent coordinator who will contact parents to ensure that their needs were met and to see if they had any follow-up questions. Through these progress surveys, we will implement the feedback in the next meeting or conference. 2018-19 CEP 69 
