2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M299 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR ARTS, IMAGINATION AND INQUIRY Principal: STEPHEN NOONAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Maxine Greene High School for Imaginative Inquiry 9 - 12 03M299 School Number (DBN): 310300011299 122 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, New York 10023 212-799-4064 Phone Number: 212-799-4171 Fax: Stephen M. Noonan snoonan@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Stephen M.Noonan Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jennifer Levy Iris Vega Ortiz Sonia Ventura Elba Valentin Iaisha Johnson Isaiah Perry Holly Fairbank District Information Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, New York 10001 fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Affinity FSC FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (718) 935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Stephen M Noonan Jennifer Levy Iris Vega Ortiz Mary King Sonia Ventura Iaisha Johnson Isaiah Perry Gregory Andronica Elba Valentin Sharon Parker Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Maxine Greene High School for Imaginative Inquiry (MGHS) is a learning community in which deep engagement with works of art enhances the imaginative capacity leading to the intellectual rigor of all students. This approach to inquiry based learning is rooted in the philosophy of Dr. Maxine Greene which fosters a sense of self-worth, curiosity and empathy. MGHS empowers this diverse community to work towards a more just, humane and vibrant world. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The MGHS structure for improvement is designed to provide students and teachers with the necessary supports to achieve the common mission of the school. In order to accomplish this, school structures focus on strengthening the instructional core to create a culture that promotes students to think like college students and problem-solve like professionals in the workplace. Within this platform, all students will be able to access all measures of learning through culturally responsive and sustaining pedagogy. The following highlights MGHS structures for improvement: College Readiness Structures: ● MGHS is exploring opportunities to become a CUNY Early College school with ongoing support classes embedded in the academic schedule to provide students with time and support to complete college course work, develop time management skills, and form study groups. ● All ninth grade ELA and math classes are block scheduled to provide foundational support in which additional academic skills and curricular support are embedded along with life skills, personal management, conflict resolution, task prioritizing and time management techniques. All tenth grade social studies classes are block scheduled to provide continued support in which additional academic skills and curricular support are embedded in support of a humanities focus in preparation for expanded opportunities in the upper grades. Career Readiness Structures: College Access for ALL: There are planned activities for all four grades in addition to planned college trips. SAT Prep is provided for 11th and 12th grade students. We are hosting annual College Week to promote college exploration awareness and providing classes to support the college application process. We are in the process of collaborating with a CBO to provide PD for staff, and workshops for students and families. All of this will be apart of our creation of our MGHS College Access office. Teacher Feedback Structures: ● Inter-Visitations (Instructional Rounds): Team Leaders work with teachers to arrange classroom visits based on the set focus for the month and marking period. Teachers coordinate departmental inter-visitations as well as inter-departmental visitations through the SDC. They collaborate to establish protocols, develop tools, and decide on the specific lens with which to guide inter-visitations. All inter-visitations are Danielson aligned. ● Observations: Teachers at MGHS begin the observation cycle, whether formal or informal, with a self-evaluation. When observations begin, conversations are grounded in evidence from low inference transcripts of class visits with the purpose of targeting areas for improvement. Coaching sessions are provided to best support teachers in their target areas of improvement. Teacher Team Structures: ● Common Planning: MGHS Teachers have been assigned a common planning time within their daily schedule to discuss and analyze student work, perform data inquiry, review curriculum, and determine best strategies for lessons. They heavily engage in: inquiry work, skill gap/ data analysis, curriculum development, and sharing best practices. All of the departmental work is connected to the PD plan and schedule which is set for Tuesdays from 2:30-3:40. ● Co-Teaching: 2018-19 CEP 10  The co-teaching model at MGHS is unique because it is not limited only to classes with a special education population. MGHS utilizes three different co-teaching models: simultaneous teaching where two teachers teach the same lesson to two smaller groups, lead teaching where one teacher teachers and the supporting teacher assesses, and a blended learning model where one teacher leads the lesson while the second teacher facilitates learning using online tools. ● Facilitators Meeting: Weekly, Department and Cohort Teams meet with administration to plan for the week and receive leadership coaching. Department and Grade Team Leader meetings are scheduled twice a month, so that Team Leaders may have a chance to meet with admin and discuss team progress and strategies that may be implemented going forward. Credit Accumulation: ● Focused Credit Accumulation – This is the second of a four-year long restructuring initiative designed to support student academic achievement and to maximize opportunities for credit accumulation and preparation for all students to achieve college readiness metrics. Data collected and interpreted by our teacher teams has been the driving force behind getting and keeping MGHS students on-track for graduation. Each teacher team has been directed to focus on our on-track and top tier target groups to ensure they achieve college ready regents scores and GPAs along with lower achieving groups of students and their specific needs in the classroom. The Inquiry work for all of our target students that has been done has helped develop appropriate corrective measures that will fit the needs of each student. Practical measures that have been implemented include Saturday School, staff/student awareness around credit accumulation and recovery, and teacher PD in across various instructional strategies around differentiation and lesson design. ● Monitoring of Student Progress - Guidance counselors and teacher teams regularly monitor every student’s progress towards graduation and collect data that informs not only future programming but test prep, after school tutoring, and lunch and learn sessions. ● Semester Schedule - Comparison of data of the previous academic year provides baseline data to which our inquiry work can compare credit accumulation progress for all of our students. We expect to see significantly increased rates of credit accumulation by the end of this year. Attendance Structures: ● Attendance Incentive Program: Our yearly attendance for 2017-2018 is 83.9 % overall which is a 2 % increase over the previous year. The Attendance Team is exploring ways to provide incentives for on-time arrival and rates of average daily attendance in each grade. ● Attendance Awards: At school assemblies, planned by each grade team, awards are given to students for both perfect attendance and improved attendance throughout each semester. ● Outreach: Through the use of direct teacher outreach, Attendance team outreach, and Skedula, there is a means by which both in-person and automatic outreach is made each day for each absent student. Teachers additionally use the Skedula tools to conduct outreach for period lateness. Meeting and Planning Time. Overall, teachers' professional periods and weekly meetings time are used for academic team meetings and coaching. Our teacher teams are vehicles for monitoring and adjusting our instruction to meet our stated goals and the needs of every child. Every aspect of the school’s program is monitored and revised continuously as we work for effective teacher practice to increase student development and achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 11  Students At-Risk Special Education: For 2018-2019, 26 % of the school's register are identified as being Students with Disabilities. In order to support the academic and social emotional growth of these students, a team of both Special and General Education teachers will monitor academic progress toward meeting learning goals as articulated in each student's IEP. Second Language: For 2018-2019, 19 % of the school's register are identified as being English Language Learners (ELLs). In order to support the academic and social emotional growth of these students, a team of both Second Language and General Education teachers will monitor academic progress toward meeting learning goals as identified following a review of NYSESLAT data. This school is comprised primarily of students who enter high school below grade level in ELA and Mathematics following school-based assessments administered in the eighth grade. Most students meet the federal criteria for free and reduced lunch. We are very aware af student progress and performance. All subgroups are monitored and progress continuously assessed. Instructional support is provided by teachers who work collaboratively in mainly push-in settings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. ATS, SESIS, Skedula, and other school system reports have guided our data analysis around addressing key focuses for our school. Strong Family & Community Ties: In May, 2018, we attained an increase of 25 % in the number of families who participated in Student Led Conference. This is an improvement of 25 % over the 2016-2017 school year. Our goal was exceeded by 5 %. This will be the fourth year of the SLCs and we will continue to welcome families to these conferences. School Environment surveys as well as administrative surveys along with statistical data was reviewed to inform progress made. Attendance and teacher outreach for SLCs was continuously monitored. Supportive Environment: UPDATE By June, 2018, we realized an increase of 4.9 % to 83.9 % average daily student attendance. While we did not reach our intended goal of 84 %, this improvement will continue to be an area of focus during the 2018-2019 school year. We will continue working to improve average daily attendance by all students. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M299 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 378 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 6 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 79.6% % Reduced Lunch 11.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 57.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 82% 60% 67.0% 1.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES No N/A 93 88 2 4 82.4% 1.3% 24.6% 35.2% 1.6% 3.4% 6 24% 6.1 N/A N/A 74% 73% 82.1% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: o The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. This year in particular, the bulk focus of this work will occur within the subject department settings where we will analyze and reimagine our content assessments. o The entire staff has incorporated the use of binders, school agendas, Cornell Notes, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, and Common Core Aligned Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. ● Needs: o The school and staff needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to analyze formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. All grade Teams will be supported by the Grade Team leaders and the AP of Instruction, who in conjunction with the Data Specialist will provide the Grade Team with the necessary data required to make informed decisions. o The school and staff needs to continue to work on providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level. The final pass result for the ELA Regents Examination was 66 %. There was an increase in the rate of participation as all ninth grade students were invited to take the test. This included members of all subgroups whose performance was then subject to item analysis and intensive review by the grade level team who will be working with those students in the then grade. Students who do not meet college-ready performance scores will retake the examination in the following grade. In addition to school-based data, the NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey were reviewed to inform progress and efficacy. According to that data, we have reached an average of 67 % graduation rate with 28 % graduating college ready meeting all requirements to qualify, and 15 % successfully completed and pass approved college or career preparatory courses and exams. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by a 5 % increase in the average number of students demonstrating college readiness on the ELA and math Regents examinations, from 28 % to 33 %. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Grade Team Leaders, All Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Within the Subject Department Team structure, teacher collaboration and inquiry will take place that focuses on student work and proficiency through grade level data meetings, content area and school-wide meetings will be used to plan and assess student activities in order to meet their needs and help students meet performance goals. Each week teams will examine student work samples to analyze the lesson present connected to the student work, determine student understanding and mastery by the teacher's model/exemplar and expectations, and make next steps based on the students work as a whole. Extended day PD series will be designed to tailor to designing and analyzing assessment (3D Using Assessment in Instruction), and connecting other areas such as co-teaching collaboration, targeting small groups, and providing various scaffolds that will help all students understand and master the tasks within their classes. The data collected will come from the teacher observations and coaching visits which will provide additional support in showing measures of success. All ELA and math teachers will administer a common predictive assessment which will capture all student data by 11.15.18 All Students November 2018 Professional Development opportunities based on staff needs and interest, with a focus on using data to inform instruction, differentiated instruction to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment. All Students September 2017 – June 2018 Principal, AP, All ELA and math Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Department and Grade Teams, PD team from Lehman College As a Professional Development Site (PDS) with Lehman College additional supports will be provided by the addition of a member of the college faculty who will be working with teachers through structured professional development and ongoing coaching in support of the Imaginative Inquiry protocol currently in development. The writing protocol will be introduced to the teachers in the first semester and implemented in the second semester. Oversight of this initiative will include ongoing data analysis, continuous cycles of observation, strategic 2018-19 CEP 16  intervisitations and learning walks and the weekly and daily meetings currently scheduled. These strategies are specifically suited to support student learning and address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and our other high-need student subgroups including, but not limited to, over aged and under credited students. Instructional support of student progress such as tutorial and Regents prep will occur in all classes, and during after-school and/or Saturday opportunities All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal All Teachers Students will be supported by a variety of strategies including the use of binders, Academic and Content Vocabulary, text annotation and close reading, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, small group instruction all aligned to the Common Core units. Following a transcript review, all MGHS 10th and 11th grade students, as well as 12th grade students who have not received the grade required on the ELA CC Regents to be considered College Ready (75%) and the Algebra Regents (70%) will sit for the January 2019 ELA CC and Algebra Regents. This data will be compared to the November baselines to see what gains have been made and to see how targeted instruction can be best utilized to increase students literacy to the 5% increase stated in this goal by February 2019. The college readiness will increase by 5% from 28% to 33%. All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, All Teachers All Students January / February 2019 Principal, all teacher and guidance teams All MGHS students will show an overall increase of 5 % on the ELA Regents examinations and 5 % on the Algebra Regents. All Students June 2018 Principal, All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will introduce curriculum and academic supports of this goal during the first Family Meeting Night in September 2018, and the parent coordinator will continue this during ongoing parent association meetings each month. The parent coordinator will share best practices and strategies from the teachers that are being implemented in classrooms so that parents are aware and can practice with their children. Parent Association meetings are held in the main office where all key resources are available . In addition, the parent coordinator will collect new updates from teachers from subject/grade team leaders in preparation for the parent association meetings so that parents are kept abreast of their children's learning. Parents are contacted by all staff members through phone calls, emails, and blast messages through IO messenger. The parent coordinator sends out monthly blasts for parents in addition to personal calls regarding student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  Staff will need time for participating in professional development and coaching, planning for implementation of strategies in instruction, providing tutorial for students, and supplemental instructional resources such as releases Regent exams and technology. Per session will be allocated as needed as well as consultant fees for Generation ready coaching. Teachers and administrators will work during scheduled team meetings and posted Per Session activities. Instructional resources will include baseline testing and support materials. Teacher schedules will be adjusted to allow for additional planning time for grade and department teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, we will increase the level of rigor in literacy, as evidenced by a 5 % increase students meeting college readiness benchmarks on January predictive outcomes and/or the ELA and Algebra Regents Examinations. Grade teams will review and compare Regents results with past scores in order to monitor progress. The November assessments will be administered and all ELA and Algebra teachers will use this data to inform their planning, develop a needs assessment for students and look at trends to focus upon during Regents review at the end of the first semester. Regents review classes will use the assessment data in order to focus instruction and to develop a targeted plan for students taking the Regents in January, 2019. Assistant Principals will review data and follow up with the appropriate teams who are working to implement these improvements including the Pupil personnel, guidance, Cohort and content teams. Families will be apprised of student progress throughout the year and invited to participate in planning meetings related to progress toward graduation and promotion. Workshops will also be provided related to post-secondary readiness and college applications. All aspects of school records, including progress and grade reports as well as transcripts will be reviewed in small group and individual settings by the guidance staff and scheduled by the Parent coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Predictive examinations will be administered to all students three times: November, January and June. Teams will review test outcomes following each administration. The November and January predictive will have been administered. The predictive used is a the baseline and Regents examinations. The results of these assessments will be used to target specific instructional needs and to drive inquiry team work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● Strengths: o All students are assigned to the new attendance teacher who meets with them once a week or as needed. o Common lessons are used in all grade level teams that focus on a variety of topics including Attendance, Goal Setting, Organizational Skills, Problem Solving, Growth Mindset and Team Building. In regards to chronic absentism, all students including at-risk seniors have been assigned to specific teachers for credit and regent intervention and mentoring with preparation for graduation and college. ● Needs: o The school and staff needs to continue to work on establish systems and routines to analyze trends in student attendance, lateness, detention and suspension data. o The school and staff needs to continue to work on identifying and addressing the behaviors that most commonly lead to lateness, absence, detention, and suspensions. Data from the NYSED School Report Card and School Performance Dashboard were reviewed and ongoing monitoring will continue to gauge progress. Attendance trends and patterns, particularly newly admitted students and LTAs are monitored continuously. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will develop opportunities that effectively deepen student ownership of their learning, as evidenced by a 5 % increase in students with over 90% attendance, from 53% to 58%. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school leader communicates school goals that are timely, transparent and available to all stake holders. in order to improve attendance among LTAs and at risk students as well as improved attendance for all students School leaders encourage the staff to use systems that are dynamic, adaptive, interconnected and lead to the through analyses of goals and outcomes that disaggregate attendance trends and communicate progress School leaders espouse and support practices in areas that support student progress and achievement and which include outreach to families and other student support Teacher leaders and administrators engage in data review and address alternating trends in student enrollment and attendance All students September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers and Attendance Team All administrators and teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal, Attendance Teacher, Attendance Team Assistant Principal and Attendance Teacher All Teachers and families September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher and Attendance Teams Principal, Assistant Principal, Attendance Teacher, families Team goals are crafted around thoughtful analysis of student data and systems are designed to ensure that the alignment of team goals support the teachers' individual goals. This work is structured around the weekly team meetings and ongoing evaluation of the PD plan. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will work to involve, engage, and educate families in order to deepen their understanding of how regular, on-time daily attendance leads to a truly Supportive Environment. In so doing they can support their children both at home and while they are in school. Parent Engagement/Education activities will included school and family meetings when required and more sever intervention when situations warrant such outreach. Continuous parental outreach will be conducted via telephone, outreach by the attendance teacher, guidance counselor, teacher-advisers, as well as providing parents access to real time attendance data via the online system Skedula (PupilPath). 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for participating in professional development and analysis of student behavior data, planning for implementation of strategies, and providing behavior support structures for students. Teachers will reach-out to families during regularly scheduled outreach sessions and additional resources will provide possible per session activities to support staff outreach to families. The attendance teacher will attend regular meetings with the team and administrators to support all improvement efforts. Teams will be apprised of grade-level attendance trends so that instructional strategies can support and coordinate with all attendance interventions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the average daily attendance rate will be 85 %, as measured by attendance data which will be used in February to measure the school’s progress towards meeting the annual goal. We will align the mid-point benchmark to the goal and the Framework Element, which will ensure that the mid-point benchmark is an accurate indicator of progress toward meeting the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance is monitored using ATS reports to determine all at-risk students and areas of focus. These reports are used to drive daily and weekly teacher outreach and guide the discussions around attendance during their parent outreach time. School Counselors and our Parent Coordinator make outreach throughout the week for attendance and lateness. The new attendance teacher will work to support this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: o The entire staff meets weekly to participate in inquiry work done within the Grade Team platform, professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student attendance data . ● Needs: o The school needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to support teachers in the analysis of daily and period attendance trends. o Teachers need to continue to participate in staff development opportunities in support of active engagement of students in meaningful academic work which stimulates regular and on-time attendance particularly for English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, teachers will demonstrate increased proficiency in the use of ongoing assessment protocols and data to support student achievement, as evidenced by an average of 8 % continued increase in students’ credit accumulation across grade levels as the result of improved student mastery showing an average rate of improvement of 68 % to 76 %.. 2018-19 CEP 22 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff Principal September 2018 - June 2019 All Staff Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher inquiry-based collaboration that focuses on student work and proficiency through grade level data meetings, content area and school-wide meetings will be used to plan and assess student activities in order to meet their needs and help students meet performance goals. Professional Development opportunities based on staff needs and interest, with a focus on using data to inform assessment practice and criteria in support of instruction including differentiated instruction to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment. Professional development sessions available by the DOE Affinity group that will help inform instructional practice include: Working Group Series: Teachers of Beginner English Language Learners. This PL series is an opportunity for content teachers and ENL stand-alone teachers of beginner ELLs to (a) explore best practices in engaging beginner ELLs in the instructional core as well as to (b) engage in planning curriculum that is culturally responsive. Throughout the school year, participants will commit to five full-day sessions that will allow teachers of ENL stand-alone and content teachers of beginner ELLs the time and space to reflect on current practices, analyze relevant student work, explore resources, and discuss strategies to address challenges relevant to their curriculum. Afternoon sessions will consist of two working groups: ENL standalone teachers or content area teachers. Through inter-visitations and working groups, participants will collaborate, amplify and design rich curriculum to increase content area access for beginner ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 23  Content Access for All: Frameworks and Scaffolds that Support ELLs, SWDs, and Other Historically Underserved Students In this professional learning series participants will receive an overview of the advanced literacy framework, culturally responsive teaching, and universal design for learning in order to engage ELLs, SWDs, and other historically underserved students in the content areas. Participants will apply scaffolds that support success for all students in core instruction. As a participant in this series, you will also have the option of making a proposal to receive school-based coaching second semester, to support deepening your learning and extending that learning to a subset of your colleagues. Teachers of all content areas, as well as ENL and Special Ed are encouraged to apply with diverse groups from their schools. All teachers will have the opportunity to participate in order to implement best practices best suitable for our ELLs and SWD. In addition, coaching sessions will be available for planning and implementing small groups, and determining specific strategies that will best help students in class, which will be based on the student work/assessment data and other needed accommodations. Teachers will be provided opportunities in best practices around collecting assessment data, analyzing the data and employing it through professional development and collaboration. The Extended day PD time has been designed to serve as a PD series to teach and coach teachers into specific instructional areas. The primary area is around assessment (specifically 3D Using Assessment in Instruction) which based on the results of the June Regents scores. All Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Team Leaders Teachers will be provided with opportunities to participate in classroom intervisitations, with a focus on assessment. All Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Intervisitation coordinator 71 % of all students across all grade levels will be on track to earn 10+ credits. All Staff February 2019 Principal, AP Needs assessment of all students who earned less than 5 credits in the first semester will take place Students who earned less than 5 credits during the first semester will create an action plan that will assist them in garnering all of their credits in the spring semester. 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th grade students will present this plan during the SLC sessions in March. All Staff All Staff February 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselors February/ March 2019 Principal/ Guidance Counselors, 9th and 10th Grade Teams, parents 2018-19 CEP 24 Staff will monitor student progress and arrange for necessary support and/or interventions to support students in their efforts to earn 10+ credits. All Staff March/ April 2019 Principal/ AP, Teacher leaders All students with disabilities will have their progress monitored prior to IEP evaluation. English language learners will be monitored by the appropriate case manager in anticipation of annual evaluation. End-of-year interventions will be planned and managed by the students' respective teams and follow-up will be made by the team member assigned to small student groups and the appropriate guidance counselor. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to workshops and information sessions that will address the necessity of students earning credits when they are offered as the students' programs are designed to support timely credit accumulation and Regents preparation in anticipation of on-time graduation. Promotion and Graduation in-Doubt meetings will be conducted by the Principal and Assistant Principal beginning in October so that appropriate interventions may be identified early enough to impact student progress and maximize opportunities for students to meet academic goals. The Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator will follow-up at regular intervals to alert parents to progress or challenges. Parents also have access to PupilPath and Skedula so that live information regarding student performance is available for review. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for participating in staff development and leadership opportunities in addition to time for collaborating and planning implementation of instructional strategies. Teachers will monitor students' progress through ongoing and guided inquiry work during regularly scheduled sessions and in team meetings. Per session will be made available as needed in order to support the monitoring of student performance. Additional opportunities will be explored through the school partnership with Lehman College as a PDS. Per Session will be allocated as needed for any training to be conducted outside of regular school hours. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June, 2019, 80% of all students across grade levels will be on-track to earn 10+ credits. The instrument of measure will be the STARS Report which shows which students have fallen short (less than 5 credits) for the first semester. Pupil personnel staff are will conduct a credit audit to determine which students did not earn 5 of 7 credits for the first semester (used to determine who is on track to earn 10+ credits for the year). Once determined, the grade teams will develop an individualized plan for each of these students to support them in getting to earn the 10 credit mark. These plans will include outreach to parents to set up a scholarship meeting, behavior referral if warranted, weekly engagement and conduct sheets if necessary and an open line of communication with all teachers. This work is ongoing and embedded within the Inquiry Team process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student data will be monitored throughout the year including at the end of each marking period. This information will be reviewed also by the guidance counselor so that any student who is off-track will be offered appropriate guidance and support. Teachers will work collaboratively to monitor student progress for each grade level team. Intervention strategies for off-track students will be reviewed by the guidance counselor and teacher leader. Monitoring will be ongoing and enhanced by strategic case-management by Cohort Team members. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: o The principal meets with team leaders regularly to present professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. Team Leaders meet weekly with the Principal and Assistant Principal in order to monitor progress. o The principal meets one on one with each staff member each week to support their instructional practice. o The principal and assistant principal conduct formal and informal classroom observations and walkthroughs and provide feedback in accordance with the Danielson Framework. Strategic coaching is provided to teachers who are in-need of additional support based on the outcome of the observation process. ● Needs: o The principal needs to continue to work on establishing systems and routines to support teachers in the analysis of formative and summative data to inform classroom instruction. For 2017 3 % of teachers were rated ineffective and 38 % of teachers received developing in this component. o The principal needs to increase the frequency of informal and formal walk-throughs to support teachers in their instructional practice. o The principal needs to continue to support a variety of staff development opportunities for teachers in providing rigorous instructional experiences across all content areas and incorporating differentiation strategies to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and students reading below grade level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will improve teacher practice, as evidenced by an increase of teachers rated as Effective in the Danielson Framework for Teaching Component 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction, moving from 2.7 to 3.0 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The administration will increase the frequency of informal and formal walkthroughs and providing feedback to teachers. Teachers Principal, AP September 2018 - June 2019 Additional strategies will be devised to support the continued work of the Laps protocol successfully designed and implemented during the 2017-2018 school year. Teachers will explore strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups and appropriately assess their progress toward mastery. The administration will provide opportunities for teachers to build leadership capacity and to collaborate as an entire staff. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Team Leaders Teachers ongoing Principal , AP By November 30, 2018 By November 1, 2018 February 2019 February 2019 Principal, AP Principal, AP, Intervisitation Coordinator Principal, AP Principal, AP Teacher best practices around assessment strategies will be shared in the Grade and Department Teams. Through the use of collected and analyzed student data, and feedback from administration, teacher teams will standardize practice with in their departments and amongst grade teams. Through new inter visitation protocols, teachers will inter visit with colleagues and reflect upon best practices around data collection and analysis of student assessments, and bring these best practices into their regular routines. Teachers Teachers The average teachers rating for Danielson component 3d will be 2.7. Teachers Those teachers who are rated lower than 2.7 average on 3b, after their second observation (by February for most) will attend a directed inter-visitation with a member of the administration and from an action plan to better incorporate coherent assessment practices. Teachers who have > 2.6 on 3b in February 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 28  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed through workshops and during SLCs about effective classroom teaching. Teachers will be able to describe how they are working to monitor student progress and measure student engagement as they share assessment practices and protocols. Students will also be able to share how they are routinely assessed in class and when work is assessed. A handbook will be distributed that outlines the changes in grading policy and explains the practices of Standards Based Learning and Assessment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The administration will need time to visit classrooms and to meet with the staff as an entire group and individually. The administration will need time to design and present professional development opportunities as well as time to reflect on implementation and identify additional supports recommended by by teacher teams. The professional development plan will be revised as needed to address needs identified during the year. Additional opportunities will be explored and proposed to teachers. Per session will be allocated as needed for PD opportunities that occur outside of regularly scheduled school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the average rating for teacher performance 3.5 % in the Danielson Framework for Teaching Component 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction. Those teachers who are rated lower than 2.7 average on 3b, after their second observation (by February for most) will attend a directed inter-visitation with a member of the administration and from an action plan to better incorporate coherent assessment practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment will be ongoing throughout the year during a regular cycle of observations. Teachers will participate in coaching and professional development that will support the practice of accurate and appropriate student assessment. It is anticipated that the majority of minimum observations will have been completed by February, 2019, and supports for teachers will be in-place as instructional coaching continues throughout the school year. A review of data reported in Advance and anecdotal information gathered during the observation process will be analyzed in order to ascertain efficacy of strategies implemented. Consultation with teacher leaders will be ongoing and feedback will be reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Strengths: o Over 60 % of students had at least one parent or guardian attend the Fall Conferences. Families have reported strong ties to the school in the NYCDOE School Survey. o Teachers and other staff make phone calls home on a regular basis to keep parents/guardians updated with their students’ progress. o In addition to regularly scheduled report cards, progress reports are mailed home every six weeks to inform parents/guardians updated with their students’ progress. ● Needs: o The school and staff needs to continue to work on established systems and routines to create a welcoming environment for families such as providing parent training on graduation requirements, preparing for college, and using systems to check student grades and attendance. o The school and staff needs to continue to work on using multiple ways to communicate with families through School Messenger and Skedula through which ongoing information is regularly disseminated. o The school needs to conduct a follow-up Needs Assessment to get feedback about the best ways to encourage and increase participation from more families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our home-school partnership and empower parents as effective advocates for their child, as evidenced by a 5 % increase in family participation in educational planning meetings, conferences, and reciprocal online and phone communication from 55% to 60%. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All parents/guardians will attend either the Fall or Spring Conferences in addition to attending PA meetings and regular partnership activities with the school. The parent coordinator will facilitate the PA meetings in sharing various learning strategies and updates from teachers along with providing training in use of IO messenger and Pupil Path so that parents can self check the progress of their children. The parent coordinator will also attend PD trainings that focused on parent and family engagement in order to increase parent participation. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Families September 2018 - June 2019 All Staff and Teams Some parents/guardians will participate in a Home Visit from our attendance coordinator. All Families All Families September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 All Staff and Teams Parent Coordinator, Principal Families of English Language Learners September 2018 -June 2019 Partnership Coordinator, Principal All parents/guardians will participate in at least one parent training session on topics including graduation requirements, preparing for college, and using systems to check student grades and attendance. The parent coordinator will facilitate training in use of IO messenger and Pupil Path so that parents can self check the progress of their children. School materials and meetings will be translated and made accessible to all families in their primary language. All families will be invited to participate in the SLC process. Families of students with specific challenges (i.e. not meeting academic goals, ongoing issues with late arrival or chronic absenteeism) will received targeted outreach as required in order to address and resolve the issue. The monitoring and outreach efforts will take place throughout the year with monthly data review by the appropriate team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will continue to explain this new means by which Parent-Teacher conferences are conducted. Students in all four grades will work with a Teacher Adviser who will also reach-out to families in order to ensure continued participation 2018-19 CEP 31  of returning families and to welcome new parents to our school. Families will have a revised handbook for reference and review. Teacher teams will begin regular outreach through the monitoring of discrete caseloads. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will need time for scheduling and conducting Home Visits, preparing for and conducting parent meetings and training, time to prepare students to present during Student Led Conferences, collecting data on parent participation and survey feedback, and time to train staff in the use of School Messenger and Skedula. During Back to School night, in September, and the October Parent Association meeting, families will learn about the SLC and more information will be sent home and available on the school website,. The principal will disseminate invitations to all families participating in SLCS in late October. Teacher teams will schedule appointments with families in order to ensure full participation of families in the SLC process. In order to accommodate those families who cannot attend the SLC alternative arrangements will be made including telephone or video conferences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the number of families who participate in Fall Student Led Conferences will be 85%. Monitoring will begin in October with planning and be ongoing by the Cohort Teams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at SLCs will be recorded and a team created by the Grade Team Leaders in order to follow-up and thank parents who attend, and reach-out to those parents who do not attend. Students will also review their participation and their role as facilitator will be reviewed by the SLC coordinator. Members of the Parents' Association will also reach-out to famiilies for feedback on the SLC process to strengthen and support its growth in our school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading 2018-19 CEP 33  Social Studies Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronic attendance/tardies, multiple red passes, multiple detentions or suspensions Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Student Agendas, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socratic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Meeting with dean, social worker, home visits, phone calls to parents/guardians, conflict resolution, Student Study Team Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 51 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing receive counseling from the social worker, supplies and materials from their guidance counselor, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and extra curricular activities from the school’s McKinney Vento funding. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The administration actively recruited the current staff through interviews and recruitment events and meets one-on-one each week to provide support and hear feedback from teachers about needed support. The principal also meets with the entire staff to provide staff development and is responsive to the needs of the staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As part of the regular schedule the entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development and curriculum development opportunities including the analysis of student performance data and student work. In addition, the staff has incorporated the use of binders, school agendas, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Project Based Learning, and Common Core Aligned Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 2,898,286 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 2018-19 CEP 38  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 39  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. MGHS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. MGHSwill support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) MGHS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 43  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In order to meet the academic needs of our ELL population, we will invest in technology that will increase the academic skills of our language learners. Our Title II program will focus on addressing areas of highest need for ELL students in development of academic English with specific emphasis in reading and writing as indicated by NYSESLAT and Regents scores. Two ENL teacher will co-teach with two content area teacher two Title III classes as follows: Our current ELL population consists of 16 transitioning and 47 expanding students, who are receiving between 1-3 periods of ENL instruction per day. The majority of a ELL students are Spanish speaking, but we also service students who speak French, Russian, Chinese, etc. Students are grouped based on grade level and content area, with services being provided in their English and Social Studies classes. Since these areas use the most written language, we consider them high leverage areas for language acquisition. Program 1: Supporting ELL students academic reading and writing through Global Studies. This class will focus on meeting the needs of 10th grade students in literacy and writing. Materials used in this class will include ten iPads purchased from Title III funds and supplemented by other funds as necessary. The iPads will be exclusively used in the Title III class for online research, exploring specific websites, completing projects, various reading and writing activities. This class will be taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified social studies teacher. The program will be further supplemented with an after-school program beginning November 1, 2018 and will end on June 6, 2019. Title III classes will be conducted on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 PM to 4:30 PM. Program 2: Supporting ELL students academic literacy through ENL/ELA. The class will focus on the development of academic English, with a focus on reading comprehension, writing for communication, and oratory skill development. Materials used in this class include web-based resources, fiction and non-fiction texts, This class will be taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified English teacher. Program will start November 1, 2018 and will end on June 6, 2019. Title III classes will be conducted on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 PM to 4:30 PM. For both programs the language of instruction is English with native language support as necessary (glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, books, tech-based translators). 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III teachers alongside other teachers of ELL students, will participate in a study group focused on meeting the needs of ELL students in areas of academic vocabulary, co-teaching, and integrating instruction in language development in content area classes. Meetings will include four Tuesdays during mandated professional development time on October 2, December 4, February 5, and April 2 from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM. Participants consists of two ENL teachers, one ELA teacher, and one Social Studies teacher (all Title III teachers). Topics will include Academic Vocabulary Toolkit: Mastering High-Use Words for Academic Achievement, Explicit Accountable Vocabulary Instruction, Strategies for Prioritizing Vocabulary by Dr. Kate Kinsella. Materials will include, Dr. Kate Kinsella books, articles and other web-based resources. Other materials may be include as per teacher selection. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to meet the needs of our ELL parents and help them support their ELL children in being academically successful, we will provide a series of workshops to inform parents of expectations, resources, and supports available to them. The workshops will be provided by our Parent Coordinator and our two ENL teachers. Parents workshops will take place on the following dates: September 28, January 17, March 14 and May 1 from 6:00 PM to 7:00 PM. The following topics will be addressed: supporting ELL students participating in the TItle III program, supporting ELL students and families on their way to college, Resources for ELL parents to strengthen school/family communication (technology based translators, emails, other web-based sources), and helping parents access cultural institutions and resources in New York City. Parents will be notified about Title III activities and services through our Parent Coordinator, phone messenger, letters, and Skedula. Translation and interpretation services will be provided for each workshop. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. These funds will be used for per session in order to run the after school program for ENL students. These funds will be used to provide professional development for teachers. These funds will be used to purchase equipment and instructional materials. N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $6,000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $2,000 $4,366 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Maxine Greene High School for Imaginative Inquiry Borough Manhattan School Number 299 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stephen M. Noonan Coach Jeffery Ellis-Lee ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Omatee santos ELA/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Gregory Andronica ESL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Erika Klien Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Pricilla M. Martinez Coach type here School Counselor Graham Bazikian Parent Sonia Suarez Parent Coordinator Monseratte Felicier Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Christopher Yarmy (AP) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 412 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 55 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.35%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Scantron Corporation online Performance Series reading test to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The test provides an individualized measure of student instructional reading ability. It is a computer-adaptive diagnostic test that is able to pinpoint the proficiency level of students. According to the data collected by the Performance Series diagnostic, 22% of the ELLs are at a 4th grade reading level, 50% fall between a 6th-7th grade reading level, and 28% are at or above a 9th grade level. Of the three students who are Intermediate ELLs, one reads at a 4th grade level and two read between a 5-6th grade level.This means that 72% of the ELLs are below high school reading level. Since 83% of the ELLs at the school have tested at the Advanced level on the NYSESLAT, in order to support these students to score proficient on the exam, there needs to be a focus on improving literacy. In addition to content-area textbooks that are on ELLs’ instructional level, the ESL class focuses on building literacy skills. Teaching students strategies for approaching a text through questioning, analysis of details, story mapping, and using context clues, are essential. There is also a focus on teaching academic vocabulary that students will encounter across content areas. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The overall success of our program is measured by the quality of instruction delivered by the ESL teacher and other content area teachers, as observed by the school administration. It is also measured by the increase in our parent participation and parent involvement in the school through the SLT and PTA. ELLs' academic progress is measured by student transcripts and credit accumulation as well as conferencing with ELLs done by the ESL teacher and guidance counselors. We see improvement in our ELLs English proficiency through year-to-year growth in English proficiency levels. This will be measured by using the results of both the NYSESLAT exam, as well as the students success in ELA classes and on the ELA Common Core Regents Exam. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Historically, 10-15% of the ELLs at the school are at the Intermediate level. The school does not usually have students at the Beginning level. 85-90% are Advanced. Usually a 9th grade student who has entered at the Intermediate level will move up to Advanced by 10th grade. This year there are 16 freshmen ELLs, 5 sophomores, 4 junior and 1 senior. In the last five years, the school has always had more ELLs in 9th grade than in any other grade level. This reflects the increasing proficiency of ELLs as they move from one grade level to the next. The ESL program has had success in improving the proficiency level of its ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Classes are heterogeneous, with mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 54  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL as a stand-alone course is offered one period a day, five days a week to all ENL students, regardless of student proficiency level. Integrated ENL is offered in ELA classes, with the ENL teacher pushing in one period a day, five days a week, regardless of student proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area classes ELLs take are inclusive general education classes delivered by teachers certified in the content areas. Instruction is given in English. The self-contained ESL program supports student work in the content area classes of English and Social Studies. The ESL teacher provides ELLs with support in their other content area classes during push-in periods and tutoring sessions held during student and teacher free periods. Tutoring is also available after school. Content area teachers use heterogenous grouping of students during group work to support ELLs. The ESL teacher works with content area teachers to develop word walls in content area classrooms to support vocabulary acquisition. Teachers in social studies classes teach students how to annotate readings by modeling the technique and having students practice using annotation while they read content area texts. Teachers across content areas have begun to teach students vocabulary specific to formal argument and to ask students to identify details in the text that support claims students are making within the context of the content area. This instructional focus is aligned with the school’s adoption of the Common Core Learning Standards. These techniques have enriched ELL language development. The ESL teacher provides integrated ENL services in all ELL student ELA classes, regardless of profiency level. The teacher provides support to the ELL students by providing additional CCLS aligned materials. Currently the ESL classroom has a library catering to both the general body and ESL students. Books that support ELLs in content areas are available in the ESL classroom library as well. All content area classes offer textbooks in students’ native languages, when available, to support the students' native language. In addition, glossaries designed specifically for ELLs are made available by the ESL teacher for individual student use to further support the students' native language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ESL teacher works with one of the Spanish teachers to administer a Spanish-language diagnostic at the beginning of the school year to measure Spanish-speaking ELLs proficiency levels in their native language. Currently there are no ELLs with native languages besides Spanish at the school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We don’t currently have students identified as SIFE. An ELL identified as SIFE would be given 2 periods of self-contained ESL per day, as well as received 1-2 periods of push-in ESL daily. SIFEs would be paired with advanced-level ELLs in various content area classes as a way of providing peer-to-peer support in addition to support provided by the teacher. The ESL teacher currently has a collection of graphic novels of texts currently part of the school's ELA curriculum to support instruction in ELA. ELL Newcomers are informally interviewed by the ESL teacher to determine how comfortable the student is with attending school in the US. The NYSESLAT scores are also reviewed to determine English proficiency if the student has been in the US 1 year or longer. If the student appears to be having difficulty adjusting to schooling within the US, the ESL teacher will refer the student to the bilingual guidance counselor, if the student's native language is Spanish. If the newcomer is in his/her junior year of high school and is scheduled to take the ELA Regents exam, the ESL teacher will provide additional practice with the exam during self-contained ESL classes. ELLs who have received 4-6 years of ESL services and have shown continual and steady improvement in English Language proficiency will be monitored to measure whether or not their proficiency continues to improve. Those whose proficiency 2018-19 CEP 55  levels have plateaued will be given targeted instruction in the modality in which their NYSESLAT scores are the lowest. ELLs who have completed 6 years of ESL services will be given targeted instruction in the modality in which their NYSESLAT scores are the lowest. They will also be given a reading diagnostic, such as the Bader, to give the ESL teacher additional information about their reading level. These students will be given additional vocabulary and reading comprehension instruction as necessary. Former ELLs are given the opportunity to continue in an ESL class in addition to the ELA class that corresponds to their grade level. Former ELLs are also given extended time on formal assessments, including state and district mandated testing, as well as the use of glossaries and dictionaries in native languages. The ESL teacher tracks the progress made by ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT, providing academic support when needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The guidance counselors identify who the ELL-SWDs at the school are at the beginning of each school year. They then work with the ESL teacher and related services teacher to program ELL-SWDs into both ESL and SETSS classes, ensuring that these students receive all mandated services. ELL-SWDs are often given push-in ESL services in a content area class in addition to their ESL and SETSS classes. The ESL teacher and related services teacher meet frequently to discuss the needs and progress of ELL-SWDs. Visuals are used to illustrate vocabulary lessons. Graphic organizers are used to plan writing assignments before students are asked to complete writing tasks. Pre-reading strategies, such as text-previewing and accessing prior knowledge by discussing the themes of texts, are used before read alouds and independent reading. Teachers provide ELL-SWDs with outlines of notes that can be annotated during direct-instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular flexibility is achieved through co-planning between the ESL teacher, the related services and content area teachers. Teachers are instructionally flexible in designing lessons for ELL-SWDS through differentiating the assessments they assign students. Students identified as ELL-SWD are scheduled into both self-contained ESL classes and SETSS resource room classes. This ensures that students are provided with both mandated services. The ESL and related services teachers review IEPs of ELL-SWDs together to discuss what strategies work best to address student academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently, the ESL teacher pushes into freshmen Social Studies classes. Advanced ELLs are programmed for both ESL and ELA classes. Teachers from all departments are available during student lunch two days a week for tutoring. A teacher from the math, social studies, ELA, and science departments provide tutoring for students after school. Materials in students’ native language are available, as necessary. The school computer lab is available throughout the school day and after school for students who need extended time to complete projects or for completing online enrichment activities. Through professional development beginning at the start of the academic year, teachers have been made aware of which students in their classes are ELLs; they were given the list by grade level and language proficiency. They have also been given data about the ELLs in their classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we will be adding Integrated ENL services for our ENL students in their ELA class. This will be done by the ENL teacher working collaboratively with the ELA teachers 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we do not see a need to discontinue any of our services for the upcoming school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 56  Student programs are open to all students. Students enroll in school programs via their guidance counselor or by attending meetings the first day the program meets. The ESL teacher offers after-school tutoring for ELLs every Wednesday and Thursday for two hours. More in-depth help with homework, projects, and study skills are offered at that time. There are several music groups that meet after school. Participation in these groups are determined by student performance in their music classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school has concentrated on incorporating current technologies into classrooms for student use. SMART Boards are available in every classroom. Teachers have received ongoing training on its use during in-house professional development. This has enabled students to interact with lesson plans teachers have created incorporating the internet, i.e., planet earth, Smithsonian etc. There are several computer carts available for classroom use, as well as a computer lab. These are used for research projects, word processing, testing, among other activities. The self-contained ESL classes have used the computers to access interactive audio files for the ESL literature textbook. The school uses Jupitergrades.com, an online gradebook that gives teachers, students, and parents access to student academic progress, homework assignments, and daily student attendance. It also allows for email correspondence between parents and teachers. This has helped ELLs be more accountable for keeping track of their progress in their classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support for our Spanish-speaking population is offered during free-periods by the Foreign Language department. Spanish-English glossaries are provided to ELLs for use during their content area classes. ELLs are encouraged to use one another to translate concepts difficult to grasp in English. Spanish-language independent reading books are made available to students in the Spanish classroom library, with many popular young adult fiction titles translated from English into Spanish. Spanish language magazines are also available. The school has two Spanish-English bilingual guidance counselors to provide services to students and families whose first language is not English. The LAP team has begun discussion to prepare for a time when the school has ELLs whose native language is not Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support services and resources we make available to our ELLs are designed for high school students between the ages of 14-19 and in grades 9-12. We make sure to provide services that are developmentally appropriate for our students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school has concentrated on incorporating current technologies into classrooms for student use. SMART Boards are available in every classroom. Teachers have received ongoing training on its use during in-house professional development. This has enabled students to interact with lesson plans teachers have created incorporating the internet, i.e., planet earth, Smithsonian etc. There are several computer carts available for classroom use, as well as a computer lab. These are used for research projects, word processing, testing, among other activities. The self-contained ESL classes have used the computers to access interactive audio files for the ESL literature textbook. The school uses Jupitergrades.com, an online gradebook that gives teachers, students, and parents access to student academic progress, homework assignments, and daily student attendance. It also allows for email correspondence between parents and teachers. This has helped ELLs be more accountable for keeping track of their progress in their classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school conducts an open house for eighth grade students interested in attending our school. The ESL teacher and parent coordinator are present at the open house to answer questions ELLs and their families may have about what type of programming is available. At the beginning of the summer before they start 9th grade, incoming students are required to attend a school orientation that takes students and their families through a mock student schedule, acquainting students and families with what it will be like to attend the school. The ESL teacher and parent coordinator are also present at this event. Over the summer, the school offers a summer bridge program to give incoming freshmen a head start with the freshmen ELA 2018-19 CEP 57  and math curriculum. ELLs are especially targeted in recruiting for this program. The summer band, orchestra and choir programs familiarize students with the music program at our school before the fall semester begins. The LAP team has begun discussing ideas to recruit more ELLs to the summer bridge program. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are paired with ELLs who are familiar with the school. These students help new ELLs navigate the school. New ELLs also meet regularly with their guidance counselor who keeps track of their integration into the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language classes available at our school are Spanish language classes, from beginning-level classes to Advanced Placement Spanish Language. The upperclassmen ELLs at our school are all encouraged to take the AP course. There are currently 2 former ELLs taking the AP Spanish Language course. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel at our school receive professional development in strategies to support English language learners, with a focus on providing scaffolds and adjusting instruction to address language needs and promote reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. These sessions take place on a weekly basis throughout the year and include the following topics: - Scaffolding Reading of Complex Texts for English Language Learners - Building Academic Vocabulary - Engaging and Supporting English Language Learners in Classroom Discussion - Using Student Self-Assessment and Rubrics - Planning Lessons that Integrate Universal Design for Learning Principles - Supporting English Language Learners in Meeting Common Core Standards in Literacy - Designing Lessons Implementing Achieve3000 - Using Castle Learning to Support Regents Readiness - Using Student Data to Inform Instructional Adjustments that Address the Needs of English Language Learners Professional development is facilitated by the administrative team, instructional lead teachers, and a consultant from Teachers College, and other ESL specialists from the DOE. Professional learning sessions take place during daily common planning time. Teachers work with facilitators in small groups, determined by department, as well as areas of need identified through analysis of observation data. We offer curriculum development PD sessions focusing on implementing the CCLS into all classes, including ENL standalone classes as well as Integrated ENL classes. The activities will include planning using the Universal Design for Learning to provide students with multiple entry points and differentiated activities and assessments, in order to better meet the ENL student needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 58  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. HSAII supports ENL staff to assist students as they transition from middle to high school by providing them time to test each individual student, and use this assessment data to guide their instruction for each student. ENL teachers will receive ELL-specific professional develpoment through city-wide and CUNY-led PD sessions, as well as through coaching. All staff will receive 4 professional development sessions on ELL-specifics. For all staff, the assistant principal will keep agenda and attendance records, and for ENL teachers, the teacher herself will keep all information in regards to the professional development session. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences, the ENL teacher sets up individual parent meetings as "check-ins" throughout the year. At these meetings, the NYSESLAT is discussed, as well as the students progress in both his or her ENL class as well as their core subject area classes. The schools parent coordinator, as well as both guidance counselor's, act as a translator during any school meeting with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We continue to see strong parental involvement in our School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings and Parent-Teacher Association. The school Messenger System is helpful in making mass phone calls home about upcoming school events and student absences. As a result of the online grading system Jupitergrades.com, communication about student academic progress between the school and parents has improved. Many parents are logging on and we have an increase in parent phone calls to the school following up on their student’s progress. The two Spanish-English bilingual guidance counselors have also improved contact with parents of ELLs. We are now able to increase the amount of communication between the school and this parent population. Parents are invited to chaperone school field trips and attend student concerts at the end of each semester. There is an annual International Day potluck that brings many students' families to the school. The parent coordinaor acts as the point-person for all communication between parents and the school. She is bi-lingual, and speaks both spanish and english. Therefore, the parent coordinator acts as a translator during any communication between the parents and the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stephen Noonan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HSAII School DBN: 03M299 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Stephen Noonan Title Principal Pricilla Martinez Assistant Principal Monseratte falicier Parent Coordinator Omatee Santos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sonia Suarez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Gregory Andronica ESL Teacher/Subject Area Jeffrey Ellis-Lee Erika Klien Fred Walsh Daniel Walsh Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Christopher Yarmy Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M299 School Name: The Maxine Greene High School for Imaginative Inquiry Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gregory TBD Andronica TBD Teacher Teacher No No No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use ATS to determine which parents have a home language other than English. We survey our incoming ELLs and recently proficient ELLs to determine the number of parents who would like written and translation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 62  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) ENGLISH SPANISH TWI WOLOF 4 3 4 0 6 1 2 2 436 223 1 2 0.58 0.44 0.58 0 0.88 0.15 0.29 0.29 63.74 32.6 0.15 0.29 4 3 2 2 6 1 2 2 434 225 1 2 0.58 0.44 0.29 0.29 0.88 0.15 0.29 0.29 63.45 32.89 0.15 0.29 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Parent Teacher Conferences Open School Night/Afternoon translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. MGHS will provide written translations to parents who notify MGHS of this need during our initial parent 2018-19 CEP 63  teacher conferences, an office visit, telephone call, or notification through their student. MGHS is able to provide translated pedagogical and emergency information to parents in a timely manner. We also have a short survey asking parents if they need any translation services. We currently use in-house staff and PTA volunteers for these services. Students are offered bilingual content area glossaries if they are available in their home language, and are provided with Regents exams in their home language if they are literate in 2018-19 CEP 64  their home language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school PTA Ongoing plan to provide interpretation service(s)? MGHS will provide verbal interpretation services for parents who notify MGHS of this need during our initial parent teacher conferences, an office visit, telephone call, or notification through their student. We also have a short survey asking parents if they need any translation services. We currently use in-house staff and PTA volunteers for these services. The Parent Coordinator and one of the Assistant Principal's provide verbal translation 2018-19 CEP 65  when Spanish-speaking parents come into our school. Parents may also call her for an explanation of any letters sent home. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Communication with parent is made via school messenger and Kinvolved. Both programs provide digital translation of messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC coordinator will attend professional development during the 2018-2019 school year. They will them be responsible for providing PD to our Parent Coordinator, Schools Counselors and Pupil Accounting Secretary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have a parent coordinator who is responsible for obtaining and maintaining these records. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We do parent surveys and provide translation services on-site and through the NYCDOE. 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-19 CEP 67 
