2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M315 School Name: THE EAST VILLAGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: BRADLEY GOODMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: East Village Community School 01M315 310100010315 Pre-K – 5 th Grade School Number (DBN): 610 East 12 th Street New York, NY 10009 212-982-0682 Phone Number: Fax: Bradley Goodman Bgoodma4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Bradley Goodman Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: James Preimesberger Catharine Lyons Bradley Goodman N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, Room 136 New York, NY 10002 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th Floor New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Bradley Goodman James Preimesberger Catharine Lyons Rebecca Green Jenna Borden Elizabeth Wanttaja Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ CSA 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Terry Campbell Katherine Pawluk Cresta Kruger Abigail Rubin Anne Buovolo Craig Harwood Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? East Village Community School Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview East Village Community School children, families and educators are committed to learning through a balanced academic and social-emotional curriculum. Students are encouraged to explore their world while building upon their unique strengths, interests, and learning styles. 2018-19 CEP 9  It is our priority to provide an environment where all children and all families are valued, welcomed, cared for and supported. East Village Community School students learn the importance of community building, social responsibility, and conflict resolution. Our goal is for EVCS graduates to be confident and kind, academically prepared, and ready to contribute towards positive social change in the community and world around them. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. EVCS is a Pre-K through 5 th grade school in Manhattan’s District 1. We are a small school with two classes on each grade level, with an average class size of 25 students. We have both general education and integrated co-taught (ICT) classes on each grade level. Our curriculum is integrated, child-centered, developmentally appropriate, and rigorous as well as Common Core Standards-based. We have a strong commitment to instruction in the arts, and children attend at least one class in visual art, dance, music, physical education, chess, or technology every day. We are committed to the principles of social-emotional learning and have school- wide implementation of the Responsive Classroom Approach. EVCS students have made significant gains over the last several years in all academic areas, as measured by state and local assessments. We strive to maintain a culture of high expectations and academic rigor, while continuing to nurture and support the creative, developmental and emotional needs of all of our students. EVCS is an inclusive school and teachers always endeavor to have deep understanding of each individual student’s strengths, struggles, affinities and needs. Teachers meet each child where he or she is and work with them from their zone of proximal development. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One class on each grade level is an ICT class. Students in those classes represent a wide range of learning and social/emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the last several years the teachers and administration of The East Village Community School have been deeply invested in the formidable task of understanding the scope and sequence, academic content and pedagogy demanded by the Common Core State Standards, and aligning our curriculum and approach to them. Our school has a long history of championing a child-centered and constructivist approach to teaching and learning, and while our school community is committed to embracing greater rigor in our curriculum vis-à-vis the common core standards, our mission statement underscores the importance of maintaining balance and harmony between academic rigor and our overall progressive pedagogy. Our goal is to do both equally well. As such, we have partnered with numerous community organizations, including Third Street Music School, The South Street Seaport Museum, Solar One, Alvin Ailey, Chess in the Schools, local gardeners, and neighborhood musicians. These partnerships strengthen the school's overall mission to provide a balanced curriculum that teaches the whole child. In order to deliver on our promise of a school experience that balances academic rigor, arts immersion and social emotional learning, our teachers require robust and resonant professional development, and they need ample time and structures to support collaboration, planning with grade-level partners and across grade levels, and opportunities to study their own and their colleagues’ pedagogy in a collegial manner. We have been working on a distributive leadership model in our school through empowering teachers to select and design many of their own professional learning opportunities through teacher-led cycles of inquiry. We have also focused on developing teacher collaboration over the last several years, including Japanese Lesson Studies, teacher-led inquiry teams, and book clubs 2018-19 CEP 10  to study professional texts. We have a goal this year to integrate structures and routines that support universal and transferable skills of executive functioning and self-regulation. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M315 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 318 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 25.0% % Attendance Rate 24.5% % Reduced Lunch 1.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 20.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 57.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A NO N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 57 58 4 94.6% 0.6% 17.3% 5.3% 10.1% 6.9% 2 4% 5 67.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have gone to great lengths over the last five years to align our ELA and math curricula to the Common Core Standards and are beginning to align the curricula to the Next Generation Standards. At the same time, teachers implement curriculum that is inclusive of all learners and meets students where they are. We have a long-standing commitment to providing rich instruction in social studies and science, as well as visual arts, music, dance and process drama. Based on formal surveys of staff and many discussions with our School Leadership Team, we recognize that our structures for formal and formative assessments are more robust within our ELA and math curricula, and that there is need to strengthen our assessment and celebration of student work in science, social studies, and the arts, and to have a system for tracking student progress in these areas over time. Teachers have also identified a need to support student autonomy, self-direction and metacognition. Additionally, when surveyed, parents stated that they feel the narrative reports teachers already create are meaningful documents that describe the whole child, yet wished for more frequent reports about progress related to student work artifacts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in grades K-5 will be utilizing a platform for creating digital portfolios. Each portfolio will contain artifacts of inter-disciplinary learning, 6-8 artifacts of mathematical work (grade-level dependent), and 5-9 pieces of writing (grade-level dependent) that students will select along with their classroom teachers' guidance. Writing and math pieces will include rubrics that show the criteria for how the work was assessed. Each artifact of work should be aligned to the Common Core Standards and/or represent the very best of each student’s abilities, and reflect high quality work that is not always recognized in standardized assessments. These artifacts will be uploaded to the web-based app SeeSaw for parents, students, and teachers to access throughout the year. Parents, children, and teachers will utilize this digital platform to remain in an ongoing feedback and communication loop. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Student work celebrations will be held throughout the school year to share the inter-disciplinary learning and project-based work they have completed. Parents, other teachers, and related-service providers will be invited to all celebrations. All students, parents, and teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Professional Development workshops for classroom teachers revolving around the creation of inter-disciplinary units/curriculum and the use of the arts in ELA, math, science, and social studies. Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Professional Development workshops for classroom teachers and for parents revolving around the technical side of using a digital app-based platform to both share student work and to view/access it. Teachers and parents September 2017 – June 2018 Classroom teachers Principal, AP, School Professional Development Committee Principal, AP, Portfolio Committee (made up of teachers), Technology cluster teacher Students will be a part of the selection and reflection process for creating the portfolios. All students and teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP, Professional Development Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September 2018, parents will engage in learning opportunities to explore the app. Teachers will include Seesaw in monthly family shares, and computers will be made available in the main office for parents to use for this purpose. Parents will begin to view their own student's work with comments and reflections to better understand their own child's learning trajectory as well as the rubric-based expectations for that grade level. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The See-Saw app will be purchased for all students/families at our school by September 2018. 2018-19 CEP 14  A cycle of professional learning time has been set aside throughout the school year to look closely at student work artifacts and study portfolio development. Per session funds have been set aside to allow teachers extra time to work on student portfolios in the middle and end of the year. iPads and other technical needs will be purchased to support the use of this digital platform. The assistant principal will provide direct instruction to students in second grade on using the platform for self-reflection on a weekly basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In December 2019, professional learning time will be set aside to analyze this process, check in on how many pieces of each type of work have been uploaded to the portfolios, monitor parent activity to make sure everyone has access, and ensure cohesion across all grades/classrooms. In March 2019, professional learning time will again be set aside to analyze this process, check in on how many pieces of each type of work have been uploaded to the portfolios, monitor parent activity to make sure everyone has access, and ensure cohesion across all grades/classrooms. All portfolios are accessible by the committee monitoring this work and assessing its success on an ongoing basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Google Apps for Education, See Saw App Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? East Village Community School has been addressing the social emotional needs of our students through school-wide implementation of the Responsive Classroom approach and the 4Rs curriculum in grades K-5, as well as the STAR program for fifth graders. The school policy towards responding to all forms of misbehavior has always emphasized supporting and understanding all of the students involved as opposed to simply assigning punitive consequences. However, according to a survey conducted by our school diversity committee as well as a student survey from Olweus, many parents, teachers, and students feel that more targeted support is needed to directly address issues related to helping students develop empathy and prevent bullying. During the 2016-17 school year, EVCS introduced the Olweus program to teachers during a 3-hour Professional Learning opportunity and had teachers introduce the common vocabulary and definitions in all classrooms. A Bullying Prevention Committee was also started, meeting monthly throughout the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years with the format and purpose of meetings evolving throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers and students in all grade levels will have reviewed and deepened concrete structures from the Olweus anti-bullying program, and teachers will implement a series of new lessons with the intention of expanding on students' skills for preventing bullying and helping them to develop their sense of empathy. When instances of bullying do occur, students, parents and school staff will have clear and consistent language and protocols for responding to it. The Bullying Prevention committee, made up of teachers, related service providers and school leaders will set a clear protocol for meeting monthly and as needed throughout the entire school year. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All of our teachers and staff will participate in training in the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program. The Bullying Prevention Committee will create an evening/weekend workshop for parents around ways to support their children and how to use the common language the school has adopted when discussing bullying behavior. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All classrooms will have concrete signs and procedures in place to normalize the discussions throughout the entire school. students October 2018 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, related service providers and administration Parents December 2018 N/A N/A N/A Election Day, 2018 Principal, AP Principal, AP, Bullying Prevention Committee (teachers) Principal, AP, Bullying Prevention Committee (teachers) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held by Guidance Counselor as well as outside supports. School Wide Morning Meetings will review the Olweus program for parents as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will apply funds from our school budget towards materials and professional development in the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Using the DOE School Environment Survey and a diversity survey, we will see a 4% increase amongst teachers and parents in overall satisfaction in regards to the safety felt in the school, using the 2016-17 School Environment Survey, the 2015-16 Olweus student survey, and the 2015-16 diversity survey as the baseline. By December 2018, 100% of classrooms will have clear rules/norms created with the students and teachers together to reflect the tenants of the Olweus approach, the DOE's behavior policies, and the school-wide staff-created rules posted visibly in their classrooms. The use and impact of these rules/norms will be tracked during Advance-rating teacher observations as teachers and students are observed referring to the rules/norms as per Danielson 2d. The Bullying Prevention Committee will also create a tool to record and track the number of instances of bullying behavior that take place over the course of the year to measure the school's progress towards meeting our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Olweus student survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the last few years teachers have developed systems and routines for collaboration that include curriculum mapping and planning on grade teams, as well as engaging in cycles of inquiry in teachers teams that span grade levels and departments. We intend to deepen and formalize these structures, while also broadening our lens for this work by collaborating with teachers and school leaders from other schools across the city. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Throughout the 2018-19 school year EVCS teachers and school leaders will collaborate with a network of educators from two other New York City public elementary schools through the Learning Partners Program. Together, we will use cycles of inquiry to identify a problem of practice within the learning focus area of assessment, hone in on a change idea(s), and evaluate the efficacy of those ideas. The EVCS team will use a racial equity lens in approaching this work. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). LPP Team members will meet twice monthly outside of regular school hours to work on and track our identified problem of practice and change idea, and plan for visits with LPP Partner schools. LPP Visits with Partner Schools, to model inquiry practices and initiatives related to our problem of practice and change idea, and collaborate. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? LPP Team September 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, LPP Team members LPP Team, School leaders, all staff September 2018- June 2019 Principal, AP, LPP Team members How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of all initiatives related to our LPP work first at curriculum night in September and then via email and parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a LPP Host school we will receive additional funding from the DOE to support per session activity and planning that will happen outside of regular school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  In November 2018 and in March 2019, LPP team members will share at a school-based Professional Learning session about the integration of our initiatives related to our problem of practice, and update all staff on our progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff-assessment using planning tools and rubrics, to be developed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from the School Environment Survey and in-house surveys on professional learning, a need for more teacher autonomy in professional learning and greater opportunities for distributed leadership became apparent. During the 2016-17 school year the EVCS administration developed protocols for teachers to work in teams around relevant topics that they have chosen, using a cycles of inquiry model. 100% of teachers were active members of self-selected inquiry groups, with each group creating a change for the school. However, only 1/6 of teachers took on a leadership role during this work while 1/3 of teachers voiced interest during a Fall 2016 survey to take on more leadership roles during this work. Distributing leadership is a next step for this work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All EVCS teachers will be engaged in one year-long cycle of inquiry as a vehicle for professional learning. Topics explored throughout cycles of inquiry will be teacher initiated, and the inquiry teams will be teacher led. Teachers who indicate an interest in taking on leadership roles will be supported by professional learning opportunities through the District or Manhattan Field Support Center to increase leadership capacities. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be broken up into affinity-based teacher teams and will design a cycle of inquiry over two months. All teachers Identified teacher leaders will attend professional development with the MFSC. Teacher Leaders October 2018-June 2019 October - December 2018 Staff will study two professional texts and meet to discuss, in two cycles throughout the year. School will purchase the books. All teachers and administration September 2018- June 2019 AP, Principal, teacher leaders School administration, Teacher leaders Principal N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to read the professional/racial equity texts to participate in learning as a whole school community immediately following both professional book club sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders will be trained through ongoing professional development, books and other texts will be purchased for the staff using tax levy funds, and scheduling adjustments will be made on an as-needed basis for intervisitations and/or data collection for inquiry cycle teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A professional learning committee survey will be sent out in January 2019 to assess the effectiveness of the first small group cycle of learning already held and solicit feedback on the systems and structures utilized to facilitate the the next cycle of learning for groups of teachers in the spring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Learning Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We know that it is very important for our students to see themselves reflected and represented in the curriculum. It has become clear, through multiple measures including a student-led analysis of the third grade classroom libraries, that the books in our classroom libraries do not adequately reflect the diversity of our school. We intend to upgrade our classroom libraries to include many more books that center the lives and experiences of people of color, as well as books the represent diversity with regard to gender, sexual orientation, family structure, and learning profile. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Using our school's tax levied budget, we will upgrade classroom libraries by purchasing 100 new books for each of our 2nd and 5th grade classes this year in an effort to diversify our classroom libraries. The list of new books to purchase will be selected by a committee made up of teachers and school administration, but will include a process for parents to recommend books. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A committee of school staff will select from a long list of diverse books, 100 books for each of our 2nd and 5th grade classes to upgrade the classroom libraries. 2nd and 5th grade students School will purchase the books by November in order to ensure the books are integrated into classrooms this school year. 2nd and 5th grade students September 2018 - November 2018 November 2018 Teachers, School leaders Principal A committee of parents will preview books from the long list and crowd source feedback about the books using a rubric, in order to help inform the committee on which books to purchase. Parents, students September 2018 - June 2019 Parents association, School administration n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levied budget will be used to purchase books. Per session funds will go to committee members for extra time spent identifying great books for the initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  All books will be purchased by the end of November. In March we will conduct a survey of students in 2nd and 5th grade to identify the impact these books have had on their school experience. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SLT surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Record Assessments Mathematics Science Social Studies Mid unit and summative assessments, daily exit tickets Formative assessment Formative assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Anecdotal records from the classroom teacher, parent request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading interventionfor students in grades K, 1, and 2RTI reading program for all grades Differentiated tasks, online software program called Dreambox Guided reading groups around Science topics Guided reading groups around Social Studies topics Individual or group counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-one or small group work, as needed. Small groups in the classroom, individual work onDreambox When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day in both a pull-out model and small groups in the classroom, after school RTI in spring During the school day. Small groups in the classroom During the school day Small groups in the classroom During the school day Individual or group counseling in the guidance counselor’s office During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  assistance in offering after school programming (both enrichment and child-care) 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. per session for after school supports 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 32  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The East Village Community School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The East Village Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 34  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The East Village Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 36  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 38  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 39  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 40  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name East Village Community School Borough Manhattan School Number 315 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Bradley Goodman Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sylvia Vidal Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent n/a Assistant Principal Elizabeth Wanttaja Coach n/a School Counselor Megan Kennedy Parent Jamie Mowrey Parent Coordinator Jamie Mowrey Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 298 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% 2018-19 CEP 41  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses F&P Literacy Assessment tools as well as the assessment tools from Marie M. Clay. These include running records, writing observations, Bear Inventory Spelling, and oral language observations. Others include Quantitative Reading Inventory. Reading Recovery Assessments, LLI and Wilsons. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? digital data collection to share between ENL teacher and classroom teacher(s) as living documents. The collective assessment data provides insights to students strengths and weakness. It provides a lens to where students may be struggling or exceeding. For example, spelling inventory tells us what stages students are in their spelling, facilitating planning for word study, phonic practices and other focused areas. It also provides a lens to how students are understanding the language that they are listening to or reading. The collective comprehension data reveals what they are "really" understanding and where 2018-19 CEP 42 their confusions or strengths may be. Consequently, this data informs our instructional planning, which may include and are not limited to mini lessons embeded into lesson plans. Instructional plans may also include, for example more writing compared to more speaking and listening activities, if data has proven that they are proficient in listening and speaking then target instruction would be more toward reading and writing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students are evaluated through informal and formal assessments such as the NYSESLAT scores, F&P running records, in-class writing assessments, and "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? These assessments are maintained in an ESL student binder for the total years of services, of each student, and reviewed regularlly with teachers and students to determine growth in specific areas. Comparing these assessments along with the RLAT reports and the ELA and Math scores, teachers and staff are informed of the successes and needs that our ELL’s are presently demonstrating. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students take part in English-based lessons revolving around vocabulary and academic language as well as speaking/listening skills, all part of Tier 3. Less than 10% of our population receives Tier 2 language intervention using data such as running records, literacy assessments, and home language surveys. Those students identified as working with our ESL teacher are targeted in the areas in which they need such as word work, grammar work, and other necessary tools that are described in the RTI framework. These foundational tools are taught in small groups to students identified as ELLs by our ESL teacher to support their experience in the general classroom. We have universal screenings for all students, a rigorous instructional core for all students (Tier 3), and then intensive work with progress monitoring for those identified as needing it. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Accumulative data reveals the stages English learners are in and how they are processing language and meaning. The patterns across proficiency levels reveal that speaking and listening is developed at a higher rate then reading and writing. Data also reveals that our English Language learners have reached an advance level in speaking and listening but are not yet proficient in reading and writing. This data informs us of the immediate areas of need and targets specific areas for the development of writing and reading. Data informs a lower proficiency in the area of writing for both of our current ESL students. ESL teacher is working closely with classroom teachers in reviewing and discussing strategies that have been working well with the students and strategies that have not. Consequently, instructional decisions are made differentiating instruction for writing and reading comprehension. Insights reveal that students need more scaffolded instruction to bring meaning to what students are reading. Lessons, such as, those that include word studies and/or learning to deconstruct and reconstruct sentences for meaning and comprehension are some that will foster the development in these areas. Instruction is provided using various strategies tools for both reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? routine LAP team meetings, weekly grade conferences held with ENL teacher present when discussing adjustments to programs and planning next steps in Tier 2 and 3 interventions. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organization model for our schools consist of Free Standing ENL program where students travel to the ENL room. The program model is created to fit the needs of students according to their proficiency levels as well as their developmental stages. In our Pull-Out model, students are grouped heterogeneously when proficiencies are one level apart. For example; entering with emerging , or transitioning with expanding. Grade levels are also taken into consideration when grouping. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL students in entering and emerging stage receive 360 minutes of English a a new language weekly. ELL students in transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency receive 180 minutes of instructional mandated time weekly. Current English language learners are both "expanding" and are receiving 90 mandated minutes of ENL instruction. Students are serviced two times a week for 45 minutes (1 period). However we deliver content according to the mandates in CR154 for all new ELLs based on their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered and scaffold in small groups. The ESL teacher and classroom teachers often meet to discuss content learning themes, skills and expectations that ENL are currently learning and participating in their classrooms. ENL teacher then scaffolds and creates themes and lessons that align to the learning goals and related instructions of the classrooms. Differentiation is considered for instructional planning. The ESL teacher and classroom teacher plan together to scaffold and provide various ways for students to participate in their regular classrooms. Students are provided with additional support materials, such as pictures, access to computers and library. Students are given an opportunity to demonstrate their learning using various assessment tools; presentations, verbal responses, and/or by collaborating with other students. When students score commanding on the LAT but not proficient on the NYS ELA exams, for example, we consider the item skills analysis as next steps for that student throughout their 90 minutes of weekly ESL support and teaching. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are not evaluated in their home languages throughout the year; periodic assessments are all in English. However, students are offered books in their native language for content-specific learning through the NYC library system and the in-school library. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 CEP 44  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At this time, we have no SIFE in our school but in the event a new ELL is identified as SIFE, we will differentiate as follows: SIFE students are often grouped with more advanced students to provide listening and speaking opportunities. Prompts for common phrases, academic instructions, pictures and symbols are provided to students. b. Newcomer - Newcomers are often grouped with more advanced students (emerging students) to provide listening and speaking opportunities with others. Prompts for common phrases, academic instructions, pictures and symbols are provided to students. This collection of support is in their individual folders and accessible to the students in and out of the classrooms. c. Developing - Developing students continue to received differentiated instruction with less prompts. However they are provided with hands on and accessible support; such as folders, lists of phrases, and /or pictures that prompt both their speaking and writing skills. IPAD and internet access is also available at any time when working in small groups with ENL teacher. Most classrooms also provide IPAD with internet access for quick look ups (websites and apps are integrated for quick access on IPADs and laptops). d. Long term ELLs - These students receive instruction that targets the areas of most need, such as developing writing and reading skills, which are the areas that both students have scored lower compared to speaking and listening. e. Our former ELLs are tracked with same-age peers to receive Tier 2&3 interventions from the ENL teacher. Using the NYS ELA assessment and in-class assessment data, students receive additional support similar to that from Long-Term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies include but are not limited to providing opportunities for students to research, inviting students to share their interest in books and themes and creating ways for students to connect prior knowledge and experience to new knowledge and experience. ENL teacher encourages students to connect and/or use their cultural experiences for meaningful understanding of new learning. Materials that are use may stem from graphic organizer, venn diagrams, use of real objects, maps - these may look different every year depending on the individual profiles and needs of our ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teacher and special education teacher along with other members (speech, occupational therapist, etc) meet regularly to discuss learning behaviors that are common or different among the different settings. Just the same, specialist meet to discuss scheduling that is flexible to all providers and those that do not promote a restrictive environment. We strive to be an inclusive school for all students, with all adults working together to provide a supportive environment that scaffolds children. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After school Test Prep and Enrichment programs are offered in English to provide targeted interventions to students identified as in need, including ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At the present time we are not considering new programs. As part of the diversity pilot for the 2017-18 school year, improving how to work more closely with K teachers both with push-in models and sharing data on students will be necessary. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 2018-19 CEP 45  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English language learners have equal access to all programs. Parents are notified of all events and programs. They are periodically advised of changes and or needs for improvements and advised of interventions that will foster their development. Teachers also work collaboratively, discussing the needs of students and matching them to intervention programs that will target those needs. Our parent coordinator sends every parent emails, news letters and announcements of schools current events. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. White Board - visual, phonemic supports for students rather than only auditory processing Laptops - used for daily writing by students. Laptops include technologies such as text-to-type and spell check Classroom Computers - used for writing as well. Similar technologies as laptops. Listening Centers - used for auditory processing and reading comprehension. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL - Not Applicable TBE - Not Applicabe ENL - Students are encouraged to read in their native language at home. School has a limited number of bilingual text that students often take home or use for independent reading time in the classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. There is one ENL teacher that currently works for two schools housed in the same building. Therefore, services, resources and support that correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels are adequately distributed and aligned to age levels as well as proficiency levels based on prior experience and collection of resources ENL teacher as gathered throughout the years. In addition, ENL teacher often communicates with librarian and other teachers to find books that offer rich vocabulary and experiences that are appropriate for their age levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Shared ENL teacher services students on a schedule that allows all mandates to be met throughout the three schools. Other spaces (Cafeteria, school yard, auditorium, and movement room) are scheduled prior to September to ensure equity in use for all students including ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school is a progressive school which on a daily bases offers "all" students rich opportunities to engage in different activities. These activities include but are not limited to participation in school wide meetings, enrollment in music / band groups, project work, arts and drama. Special programs, such as our elective program is offered to all students in 4 th and 5 th grade levels. This includes chess, rock band, computer engineering, mural arts and musical theater. These activities and programs have proved to be enriching opportunities for our new arrivals that integrate into our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 46  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teacher (1) participates in the same professional developments provided for classroom teachers. ENL teacher also selects PD that are relevant and of interest throughout the year. These include but are not limited to ENL teacher collaboration workshops of ENL teachers meeting from different schools and ENL visits to other ENL classrooms in the district. Through cycles of inquiry, teachers (including shared ENL teacher) create professional development plans that are action-oriented and inquiry based. These groups meet every-other week throughout the year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teacher receives PD opportunities sent from principal or other related PD services. Teacher is encouraged to select PD that are most relevant and appropriate for his/her needs. To meet the 15% of total hours for all teachers, monthly PD is scheduled that allows teachers time to explore their supports and structures for building a culturally responsive curriculum while teaching directly into phonics, language acquisition, and differentiation techniques. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the present time our ENL teacher meets with parents of ELL's during parent engagement time on Tuesdays. ENL teacher also communicates with parents via email or letter correspondence to discuss goals of the program, language development progress and informal assessments that have been conducted. Phone conferences are offered both with classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and if needed a translator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school parental involvement activities addresses the needs of our parents by providing them with an opportunity to familiarize with the processes of their children’s academic development. For example families are invited during family Fridays or during publishing parties. Parent involvement also includes parents meeting through PA activities where parents can voice their ideas, concerns or questions they may have in reference to their children and their families. These activities also include parents in the decision making for our school and their children. 2018-19 CEP 47  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 48 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Bradley Goodman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: East Village Community School DBN: 01M315 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Bradley Goodman Title Principal Elizabeth Wanttaja Assistant Principal Jamie Mowrey Parent Coordinator Sylvia Vidal ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jamie Mowrey Parent NA NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Megan Kennedy School Counselor Daniella Phillips Alice Cohen NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/30/17 8/30/17 8/30/17 8/30/17 8/30/17 NA NA NA NA 8/30/17 8/30/17 8/31/17 NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 50  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M315 School Name: East Village Community School Superintendent: DPhillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Jamie Mowrey Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the RAPL function in ATS to determine what preferred languages are spoken by the parents of our students. We do individualized outreach to our families to measure their interest and needs with regard to translation and interpretation of school materials, etc. and provide individualized support as appropriate. During Parent Teacher Conferences, we remind parents that if they need assistance there are resources for this. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 313 95.43 312 95.12 2018-19 CEP 51  Spanish French Japanese Chinese Nepali Korean Tibetan 6 1 2 3 1 1 1 1.83 0.3 0.61 0.91 0.3 0.3 0.3 6 1 3 3 1 1 1 1.83 0.3 0.91 0.91 0.3 0.3 0.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The only item that we create and translate at this time is our "Welcome Letter" that defines our TOURS for the year. We also share the link page that offeres resoureces for translation during Parent Teacher Conferences. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 52  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Open House, New Family Breakfast each spring and fall, School Wide Morning Meetings- all year long, Parent Teacher Conferences, New Intitiative- Coffee with Principal Bradley, Parents often visti the parent coordinator office for various questions related to their childs education, teacher one on one meetings through out the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We post all of the materials provided by the DOE at the entrance and on our bulletin boards. We also post resources on our website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We are planning a Parent Survey/Questionaire that will go out during or directly following the conference. We also ask parents at PA meetings and have taken poll in the past. 2018-19 CEP 53 
