2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 05M318 School Name: THURGOOD MARSHALL ACADEMY LOWER SCHOOL Principal: DAWN BROOKS DECOSTA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 310500010318 K-5 282 West 151 st Street 212-368-8731 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School School Number (DBN): 05M318 Phone Number: 212-368-8641 Fax: Dawn Brooks Decosta Dbrooks5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 5 Email Address: Dawn Brooks DeCosta Pamela Patterson Moore KareemaSavinon DeneshaWatson Wendy Perry n/a Jason Garcia District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123 Morningside Drive – Unit 2 – Room 235, New York, NY 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address: drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 222-1395 Phone Number: FAX (212) 316-0451 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: YuetChu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue, NY , NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dawn Brooks DeCosta Pamela Patterson Moore KareemaSavinon TieeeshahRichardson Wendy Perry n/a n/a Jason Garcia Janet Mayers NatynaArnold Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  DeneshaWatson PamelynWilliams Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview As a reflection of the African proverb, "It takes a village to raise a child," our school values parent partnerships and collaborative efforts with various community based organizations, businesses and other institutions within and outside of the Harlem community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. There are qualities unique to TMALS that we have a commitment to continuing. Our students are aware of their heritage, they are cultured and talented. Our students are artistic and have visited various museums and galleries throughout NYC and beyond and exhibited their own work for the community. Our classes are named out of respect for leaders and Harlem landmarks. Our goal is to continue to raise the self-esteem of our children. We ask our parents and grandparents for 20 hours of volunteer service each year upon enrolling in the school. We strive towards a community of mutual respect. The students study Leaders of the Month, Artists of the Month, and Character Traits of the Month and College and Career Readiness attributes each month. Each month we highlight students who excel academically and also those who exhibit the trait of the month. We have several consistent partners that are integral to the unique experience we provide for our children: Some of our partners include: MOMA, Studio Museum in Harlem, Yale Institute for Emotional Intelligence, Doing Art Together. We have Parent Leaders and a parent group we call the Cultural Ambassadors. We have a high level of parental involvement. A full list of our partners includes: MOMA Doing Art together Studio Museum of Harlem Center Stage OPUS Dance Theater Columbia University IUME Fellows Swim For Life Hip Hop for Public Health Yale University – The Ruler Institute Columbia University – The Greek Mythology Program Mighty Milers Island Track Program SUNY at Old Westbury Faith Ringgold – Anyone Can Fly Harlem Grown NY Historical Society 2018-19 CEP 10  Chess Club NYC Debate STEM Academy 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School TMALS, is a K-5 Elementary School that is predominately African American by approximately 88%. We are a Title 1 School at approximately 70 % free and reduced lunch. At Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School, we strive for excellence in academic achievement. GROWTH: Our current proficiency rate is 46% proficiency in Math and 39% proficiency in ELA. We made gains in our Math scores and also on our Parent Environment Survey in all areas. A growth area for us is continuing to increase in both subject areas. After analysis of our item analysis on the math, we determined that our students did well on the multiple choices, but not as well on the writing around math, problem solving, short and extended responses. This will be a main goal for us this year to increase the student’s skill in explaining their thinking in writing and utilizing the Problem solving 4 step process for all grades. Certain services such as Speech and Psychologist are between three and one day a week although we do have a full time Guidance Counselor. We are in an old Catholic School building, where we feel very at home and cozy, but there are some limitations in terms of space, no auditorium, no space for a Pre K, limited bathrooms and sinks, our cafeteria is everything but sometimes this can create a difficulty in scheduling. We have approximately %20 Special needs students who we provide paraprofessionals, SETTS and Speech. However we have students who need OT and PT and they are not able to receive that onsite. Parents have to use outside agencies. GROWTH: Our current proficiency rate is 46% proficiency in Math and 39% proficiency in ELA. We made gains in our Math scores and also on our Parent Environment Survey in all areas. A growth area for us is continuing to increase in both subject areas. After analysis of our item analysis on the math, we determined that our students did well on the multiple choices, but not as well on the writing around math, problem solving, short and extended responses. This will be a main goal for us this year to increase the student’s skill in explaining their thinking in writing and utilizing the Problem solving 4 step process for all grades. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  Our school has made progress in Supportive Environment where we have established a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. We will work to improve in the area of Rigorous Instruction where Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. This will result in an increase of our Proficiency rates for students in Grades 3-5. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M318 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 221 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 19 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 77.4% % Reduced Lunch 2.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 17.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 12 12 91.3% 8.6% 17.2% 77.8% 2.3% 1.4% 0 13% 3.1 46.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The environment and culture at Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School, TMALS is evolving to support rigorous and engaging instruction for all students. The expectation is that there is an environment where all students are expected to learn at more challenging rates, demonstrate proficiency at this higher expectation. Students will receive the necessary supports to meet and exceed these challenges. There are expectations in all classrooms that include accountable talk, high level questioning and rigorous tasks in all subject areas. In ELA students are expected to use the close reading strategies and students must support their answers with textual evidence. Students are challenged through the reciprocal teaching process to make sure they are all accountable for the text. We have shown a 6% increase in our Math scores so are therefore encouraged that our process is effective. We will continue to strengthen these best practices. This year in ELA, we have shown a 2% decrease in scores. After analyzing the performance of students on the NYS Math Exams, we found that although students did well on the multiple choice sections of the exam, the writing in math, specifically the short and extended responses are where they struggled. Therefore, we have a goal to increase the focus in all classrooms on writing in math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10 % increase in school wide student proficiency in ELA and a 10% increase in Math proficiency as measured by New York State Exams and I ready periodic assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will organize and facilitate the implementation in collaboration with the Professional Development Committee, Math Lead Teacher. Further the professional growth of staff members through professional learning opportunities Administration and Staff September 2018 to June 2019  Teaching staff will conduct classroom inter-visitations with colleagues, and visit other identified schools that have successful pedagogical best practices.  The TMALS Professional Development Committee will continue to conduct needs assessment surveys in order to identify professional development activities for the 2017-2018 school year. The results of this surveys will assist the committee with tailoring professional development sessions for participants needs. The TMALS Professional Development Committee will establish professional learning communities that will consist of small groups of highly engaged professionals who meet and discuss practice centered around a common interest.  Through the I-3 grant, mentor teachers will receive professional development in order to support new teachers. Mentors and new teachers will work on creating rigorous learning objectives that are aligned to CCLS and are engaging for students which will lead to their academic success in the content area.  Universal Literacy Coach will work with K-2 teachers to develop rigorous literacy instructional practices to increase students reading and writing skills.  One teacher will serve as our Math Lead and will lead the increase in our Math presence school wide through scheduled math writing displays school wide, the roll 2018-19 CEP 15 Administration and Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Inquiry Team and staff out of a series of Math daily routines, and the use of exemplars. Enhance the educational experiences of all students  Staff will encourage the use of quality thinking by using the accountable talk strategy across all classrooms.    Supporting populations by hiring part-time staff to assist with ELL population and students with special needs. Staff will identify students who are struggling and create individual and small groups to provide them with additional supports in content areas thus providing them with multiple entry points in order to produce successful outcomes. Students will develop deep and rich content knowledge through their ability to apply that knowledge in authentic ways with curriculum-specific museum trips, plays, performances.  Through the Manhattan Borough President Grant, we have increased technology and supporting teacher use of technology into instructional practices.  Teachers are incorporating more culturally relevant text to formulate connections inside the classroom to the real world. The school has developed a school wide sharing of authentic tasks in Social Studies. 2018-19 CEP 16  All students will be invited to participate in our After school Expanded Learning Time Program for increased instructional minutes in ELA, Math and Science. Additional staff at this time will also allow for more small group instruction to target academic needs for students. We will continue to use the Polya 4 step method and UPS for solving problems and the CUBES method for K-2. We will however increase our math presence in the school by requiring more math writing lessons and introducing daily math routines in all classrooms. Our current proficiency rate is 40% proficiency in Math and 41% proficiency in ELA. To assist students in real world connections we will utilize additional resources such as National Geographic and Time for Kids. Teachers and Students September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Students To assist parents and families in deepening their understanding of Rigorous Instruction so they are able to assist their children at home Administration, Teachers September 2018 to Families and students June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent workshops, PTA abd SLT Meetings, parents will become familiar with the goals and will participate in setting goals school wide. PTA and SLT meetings occur monthly. There will be at least 4 parent workshops and meetings throughout the year, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and School Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Materials to Support Rigor in School: Grades 3-5 will use whiteboards in math for students to show mathematical computation and write explanations on how they arrived at their answer Additional staff will be hired to support small group learning for ELL population Additional academic resources will be purchased to help students bridge the content knowledge with real world application (e.g., subscriptions to Time for Kids, Scholastic Reader online magazine subscriptions) 2018-19 CEP 17  Consultancy from Teacher Development Coach Per diem for teachers to attend Professional Development Per session for Teachers for afterschool Supply resources for curriculum and assessment materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we expect a 10 % increase from baseline i ready periodic assessments and i ready mid year and end year assessments in ELA and Math. I ready will be used as the periodic assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We are using the NYS State Exams and periodic i ready assessments to gauge progress pre, mid and end of year. I ready exams will be used pre, mid and end of year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We utilize several tools to promote a positive self image for our children. We utilize character traits each month in all classes where students learn through regular class instruction and character building sessions with our Guidance Counselor. Students in each class vote on the student who exhibits the monthly character trait consistently and those students are recognized in a display each month. Students learn about leaders each month who have similar backgrounds as our children and have impacted the world in positive ways. The students learn, recite and analyze poems each month that reflect the notions and ideals towards knowledge of self. We have a student council of elected students in grades 2-5 who meet with administration weekly on concerns they have gathered from their peers. We utilize the Yale Institute Ruler Program for our staff, all classes and for our parents. The program is an Emotional Intelligence Program that we use daily to express emotions, regulate emotions, acknowledge emotions and how to deal with conflict and emotional triggers. This year we will commit to positive self concept assemblies and mentoring sessions for boys and girls separately. We have found that in this current society there is a need to help our children navigate and develop their own self image and positive self concept. We have several leadership groups and teams students can serve on such as our Meditation/Self Awareness Leaders, our art ambassadors, drumming group, step team, martial arts group, dance group, readers theatre group, visual arts group and sports group. We have leadership opportunities for our parents as well, we have our Class Lead Parents/RULER leaders and our Cultural Ambassador Parents. Parent leaders are trained by Yale and two of our Museum Partners who are collaborating for the first time this year, MOMA and the Studio Museum in Harlem. Teachers are also provided leadership roles, we have math leads, literacy leads, pd committee, events and arts committees, inquiry teams, grade teams, parent engagement leads for example. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we expect and increase of 8 % of positive responses in the Supportive Environment category related to classroom behavior which as measured by the 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report. Questions On the survey : How many teachers recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities? : How many teachers teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings)?: 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? From December to June, self concept sessions will be held once a week. Using the grades 3 - 5 students. Grade 3-5 Students December 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Grandparents Club, ELT Director To roll out the RULER for Families through a series of 2 parent workshops introducing three components of the Emotional Intelligence Program for our families to learn regulating strategies for emotions and dealing with stressful situations. TMALS Parents All students will participate in Data talk Fridays and instruction that focuses on character building, Character Traits and the College and Career Readiness Traits throughout the school year. Students RULER Committee Positive Behavior Team will look at OORS data and teacher anecdotal monthly to address any immediate concerns and needs for the children. Teacher, Students, Families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement The parent workshops will be implemented between September 2018 and June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Family Engagement Committee Admin, Guidance Counselor, Teachers Admin, Guidance Counselor, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent workshops, PTA abd SLT Meetings, parents will become familiar with the goals and will participate in setting goals school wide. PTA and SLT meetings occur monthly. There will be at least 4 parent workshops throughout the year, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and School Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling activities daily (ex: meditation), weekly (ex: character building) and monthly (ex: RULER Program/ Yale PD for parents and staff) within the month. Funds are needed to provide materials to train the students and use different venues (ex: MOMA and Studio Museum in Harlem) to develop the programs high effectiveness. This is done to 2018-19 CEP 20  improving the social and emotional climate of the school prepares students to learn as well as increase their academic performance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a decrease of 50% in classroom incidents as measured by OORS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Data comparison 2018 and 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There has been an increase in students who did not meet promotional criteria on Grade 5 New York State Common Core Math aligned exam. We have a Proficiency rate of 41% Math State Exam proficiency on 2017 exams. Although this is up by 10 % points from the previous year, it still shows that 59 % of our students including our Special Needs Population are still showing below grade level proficiency on the State Exams. We also have an increase in ELA State Exams Scores by 9% which is currently at 36%. Our special needs students make up a large portion of students at Level 1 on both ELA and Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. An increase of 10 % in positive responses in the area of Professional Community and the Focus on Student Learning as measured by the 2018 Framework for Great Schools report. Questions on the survey: How many teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom? How many teachers are really trying to improve their teaching? How many teachers take responsibility for improving the school? How many teachers feel responsible for helping students develop self management? How many teachers are willing to take risks to make the school better? How many teachers are eager to try new ideas? How many teachers feel responsible that all students learn? 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct weekly professional development opportunities for all teachers including the establishment of Professional Learning Communities. Professional development training sessions provided both in and out of the school. This will target the needs of all students including ELLs and students with IEPs. Throughout the academic year, teacher teams will schedule twice a week common meetings to support best instructional practices related to Danielson's Framework. Students’ work is assessed to provide growth and differentiated instruction. This will target the needs of all students. Administration and all teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and all teachers Administration and all teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and all teachers Both formal and informal observations and feedback will be utilized to identify teacher needs and growth. This will target all teaching staff. Administration and all teachers September 2018 to June 2019: Administration and all teachers Administration and all teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, all teachers and families Teachers in collaboration with Teacher Development coaches will support one another through peer inter-visitations and peer debriefing and feedback. Teachers will present a problem of practice and peer teachers will come with a focus on that lens with the purpose of offering strategies towards instructional growth. Teachers will utilize the Class Dojo to communicate strategies being taught with parents on a regular basis. Parents will have open communication with teachers and workshops on specific skills will be provided for families at least 2 times a year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 23  Through parent workshops, PTA abd SLT Meetings, parents will become familiar with the goals and will participate in setting goals school wide. PTA and SLT meetings occur monthly. There will be at least 4 parent workshops throughout the year, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and School Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule includes common preps for all teachers at least twice a week. Monday professional development days for teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will conduct a mid year survey utilizing the questions from the Framework for Great Schools focused on student learning. We will expect an increase of 2 percent in positive responses from staff. At least 91 % of staff will record positive responses to the survey focused on student learning as measured by our internal survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid year survey to gather information from the staff on the effectiveness of the strategies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 Framework for Great School report under the Effective School Leadership category, TMALS leadership received a rating of 96% for Inclusive Principal Leadership as compared to the Citywide average was 93% Principal Instructional Leadership was 83% compared to 86% Citywide. The area we are working on are Teacher Influence is at 59% as compared to the Citywide Average of 78%. The most recent survey shows a drop in supportive environment. We will continue to solicit information from teachers on what their needs are in the area of support and act on the most widely held needs identified by teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Summer 2019 an increase in Positive Responses on Teacher Influence of 10% as measured by the 2018 Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Committees- Teachers will elect to participate in PLC groups based on need and interest. PLCs are Problem of Practice- Multiple Entry Points and Math games and strategies. All teaching staff and support staff Inter-visitations- teaches visit peers and provide reflections, feedback, and next steps. Continue to work with the School Cabinet to provide feedback, input in curriculum, PD and resources. School community Continue to work with Cabinet and PBIS Team to work on setting standards for student behavior and engaging the community in school expectations. School Community 2 cycles Fall October – January and February - May The PD Committee, Math Committee, and Social Studies Committee in collaboration with the Principal and Assistant Principal September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Admin, Cabinet Admin, Cabinet, PBIS Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent workshops, PTA abd SLT Meetings, parents will become familiar with the goals and will participate in setting goals school wide. PTA and SLT meetings occur monthly. There will be at least 4 parent workshops throughout the year, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and School Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments for teacher team meetings, per-session for planning sessions, instructional resources for teachers and students, per diem coverage for teachers attending weekly PDs, outside PDs and inter-visitations as well as coaching session debriefing time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 26  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will conduct a mid point survey using the questions from the Framework for Great School as it relates to Teacher Influence. We will expect an increase of 10 % of positive responses on these questions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid point survey to assess teachers' view of their input and inclusion in decision making. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are all in this Together…At Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School, we pride ourselves on our strong ties with student families and community partnerships. We understand that these relationships foster self-worth and competency within our students. To that end, there are three areas that we will strengthen in order to maintain our family-community ties: hold at least two math-related parent workshops, increase family volunteerism, and partner with at least one new organization that works with community schools. Part of our mission is “…it takes a village to raise a child.” This adage is a prominent driver in our goal to establish and maintain strong and healthy relationships between our families and community partners. Our approach is based on working together in respectful and mutually supportive ways. This bond will demonstrate to our students that someone cares about them, their feelings, and self-worth. They will internalize these experiences and have a better understanding of the world around them and strive to achieve more. On the NYC School survey report, we are proud to report a 95% parent response rate. In the Section for Strong Family and Community Ties we received a 94% as compared to 91% Citywide. Maintain 94% for Parent Involvement in School. We are looking to increase our rate of Volunteerism of our Families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Summer 2019 we would like to increase positive responses regarding volunteer time to support the school by a 2% increase as measured by the 2016 NYC School Survey. The Framework Report will be used at the conclusion of the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). There are several initiatives that will be employed to reach this goal. We will start a Classroom Family Volunteer Challenge. During a specified month, family volunteer hours will be documented and totaled. The family with the most volunteer hours will receive a student and family prize. There will be at least 1 teacher led workshops for families from Grades 3-5. During these workshops parents will learn grade specific math strategies and how to use those strategies to solve problems as well as learn math games to use with their children which will help reinforce skills/strategies learned in the classroom. The PTA and school will partner together and send consistent messages to families about their 20-hour volunteer commitment status. There will be an advertising campaign targeted to all families on our Facebook and Twitter pages and through phone blasts Conduct Parent Workshops throughout the year to engage parents in academic support strategies. Families Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Engagement Committee, Administration, PTA and SLT Families September 2018 to June 2019 Admin, Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement Committee, Teachers Families September 2018 to June 2019 Admin, Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement Committee, Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Admin, Parent Coordinator, Parent Engagement Committee, Fund raising Committee, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Through parent workshops, PTA abd SLT Meetings, parents will become familiar with the goals and will participate in setting goals school wide. PTA and SLT meetings occur monthly. There will be at least 4 parent workshops throughout the year, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and School Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA meetings, flyers, phone blasts, SLT meetings, Partners providing services, school website, volunteerspot, Parent Engagement Tuesday time, Volunteer sign in logs for parents, teacher per session for Parent Academic workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be 2% increase in Parent Volunteers at the school as measured by our Volunteer sign in log. Question on the survey to parents, How many times have you been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support this school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.)? Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Volunteer Sign in Log and Parent Survey mid year to gauge progress towards goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group pull out, in class support and one on one pull out. During and after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Recipe for Reading , repeated readings and writing assignments and computer programs such as Brain Pop or Learning Farm iXL, math games, Everyday Math and computer programs such as Brain Pop or Learning Farm Small group pull out, in class support and one on one pull out. During and after school FOSS and Harcourt and Teacher Created Resources Small group pull out, in class support and one on one pull out. During and after school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades 3-5 who receive Level 1 or 2 on NYSELA Assessment Parent/Teacher concerns of Non-IEP students ( K-2 )who fall within the Level 1 and 2 range of the STAR Reading Test Students ( grades 3-5 ) who receive Level 1 or 2 onNYSMath Assessment Parent/Teacher concerns of Non-IEP students ( K-2) who fall within the Urgent Intervention range of the STAR Math Test Students in grade 4 who receive Level 1 or 2 onNYSScience Assessment as well as Unit Assessments are considered At Risk. 2018-19 CEP 31 Harcourt and Teacher Created Resources Small group pull out, in class support and one on one pull out. During and after school Mentoring, individual behavior charting, reward system Small group pull out, in class support and one on one pull out. During and after school Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students ( K-5) who receive Level 1 or 2 on unit level Social Studies Tasksare considered At Risk. Parent/Teacher concerns of Non-IEP or non-mandated counseling IEP students who are having social/emotional difficulties that are able to be addressed in the general classroom setting 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 37 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We purchase uniforms, books, resources and materials for the STH students. We also support our STH students as needed with additional small group support and resources as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33 We purchase uniforms, books, resources and materials for the STH students 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are given leadership roles and tasks and are trained and supported in their roles. Through per session funding, teachers are compensated for their training and facilitation in training of colleagues. In our ELT ExpandED Learning Time extended day program, teachers in addition to their academic days, have days they can lead a club of their creation and choice. We have PDs every Monday. We will have two cycles of Professional Learning Committees and Lesson Plan studies with topics chosen by teacher choice and need. New teachers are mentored by seasoned lead teachers on their grade. All new teachers receive an in house trained mentor. All staff is licensed and highly qualified. School based teachers are given preference to work the program since they know students, families and student data well. School based teachers cover additional classes for those teachers who are unable to work. A Teacher Development Coach works with new teachers and teachers in need of support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are provided with regular professional development inside and outside of school. Teachers seek out additional professional development that is supported by the school budget. Teachers are currently enrolled in a variety of the following, Common Core Teacher Leader Teams, Lesson Study groups, Response to Intervention-RTI teams, Inquiry Teams, Common Core Fellows and Teachers College Institute of Minority Education Fellows Program. The Principal utilizes the Danielson’s Framework of frequent observation and feedback cycles towards improving Teacher Effectiveness in the identified areas of Danielson's. This year we will receive PD from the following: Teacher Development Coaches, TASC Expanded Learning Time, Columbia University, Fundations, Orton Gillingham, Social Studies Passport, Lucy West Math and teacher leaders as well as Administration. School Based Professional Development is attended by paras as well so they are aware of the school data, goals and strategies. Paras also attend District Wide Para Professional Development twice a year and all Monday PDs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We hold several open houses for new families and collaborate with local day cares to have Pre K students experience some time in Kindergarten and the school. We hold information sessions for one of our feeder schools Mary Walton Day Care. Kindergarten teachers review the Pre School standards and communicate with incoming families regarding supports needed for individual children. Where needed, the school Guidance Counselor consults with feeder preschool staff in order to continue any early intervention supports provided. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have a Professional Development committee, A school wide Inquiry Team, Math Lead Teachers, Literacy Lead Teachers all of which consists of teachers and Administration. The Principal also has a cabinet of teachers in lead roles who have weekly meetings with the Principal. The School wide Inquiry team utilizes State Exam Data, Periodic Assessments STAR Reading and STAR Math online assessments, Ready Assessments and monthly writing and math student pieces to analyze and determine next steps for instruction. This information is also used to align Professional Development offerings. A committee of teachers on testing grades review and inform which effective resources will be used as multiple measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 36  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 121,902.00 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 69,989.00 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,404,700.00 x x n/a n/a x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Section 5a, 5b, 5c n/a n/a Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 37   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School, in compliance with Title I, Part A, Section 1118 ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 ESSA 2018-19 CEP 40  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  using academic learning time efficiently;  respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 41  implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;   offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The strengthening of the family and school partnerships will be provided in the following ways • Access to computers will be available for Parents to do research on effective Parental Involvement activities. • Provide Parents with information on TMALS and Volunteer Spot websites, Facebook page as well as staff E-mails. • Communication through class Parent Leaders text and e-mail list. • Empower parents to navigate the educational system through workshops with the parent coordinator and outside providers. • Strengthen collaboration with the home/School connection through parent coordinator. • Provide a periodic newsletter and Monthly Calendar in order to disseminate parental involvement information. • Create an atmosphere conducive to learning. • Provide needed parent workshops across the grades for general and special education as well as English Language Learning students. • Yearly workshop on transitioning from elementary to middle school and to high school then college. • Provide a TMALS community resource and Parent involvement guide.(ADC, Abyssinian, ELT, TASC, Starbucks, Barnes & Noble, Literacy Inc.) • Empower Parents to advocate responsible student behavior and atmosphere of dignity and respect by establishing guidelines to help students strive to become productive citizens in a diverse society. • Assist all Parents in understanding the standards of behavior which all students are expected to live up to and the consequences if these standards are not met. • Ensure that all Parents or guardians understand the Citywide Standards of Discipline and intervention measures. • Disseminate and articulate the Parents rights and responsibilities as noted in the NYC public Schools Family Guide. • Increase Parent knowledge on the roles and responsibilities on the Parent Teachers Associations, School leadership Team, Title- I Community Education Council and the President’s Council of C.S.D. #5. • Increase Parent knowledge of quality review, progress reports, school surveys, ARIS, as well as school and PTA meetings. 2018-19 CEP 42  • Increase Parent knowledge of our arts & education program through art workshops & museum trips( MOMA ,Studio Museum Of Harlem Faith Ringgold And One Can Fly Foundation) • School wide and grade Family Events ( TMALS Parent Orientation, Yale Institute RULER Family Night, end of year Gala ,Family Harvest Celebration, Family Field Day, Cook Shop) • Enlist Parents to become Student Mentors (The Men Of TMALS, Moms On The Move, The Grand Parents Club, TMALS Parent Cultural Ambassadors, Literacy INC. VIP Program) • The above list incorporates some of the activities our school will engage in to increase the home school connection. We are of the absolute persuasion that parental partners in the educational system work. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: • conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; • convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; • arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; • respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; • providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; • involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; • providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; • ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities   attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 44     follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Thurgood Marshall Academy Lower School Borough Manhattan School Number 318 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Dawn Brooks-DeCosta Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Constance Benson/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Debra Turner/3rd Grade Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kerri Ann Francis/SETTS Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Ms. Danika Rux Assistant Principal Ms. Kerri Ayn Seow Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Patricia Butts Parent Ms. Johanna Tejeda Parent Coordinator Mr. Craig Frierson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 46  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 222 Total number of ELLs 5 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.25% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Renaissance Learning (Accelerated Reader) to assess the early learning skills of our ELLS. We also use Fountas and Pinnell and iReady as assessment protocols for student placement. In addition to these resources our teachers use teacher-created assessments to measure student performance. Each student has a data folder to track and record their assessment findings so they are aware of what areas of improvement are needed. The ENL Teacher keeps running records of informal assessments and observations gleaned from every student session, which includes speaking, listening, reading and writing exercises. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 47  We have licenses for all students with Accelerated Reader and have Fountas and Pinell assessments to conduct 3 times a year for grades K-2. We have i ready licenses for all students in grades 1-5 and a schedule for their use. The ENL Teacher keeps running records of informal assessments and observations gleaned from every student session, which includes speaking, listening, reading and writing exercises. Given a very low student to teacher ratio (3:1), the teacher is able to assess and track closely each ELL in every session with respect to speaking, listening, reading and writing skill levels. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ultimate test of the success of the ELL program is the degree of success that students experience in their regular English classrooms. Even though they may demonstrate steady progress on the NYSESLAT, the final test takes place among their English-speaking peers, on the ELA, and eventually in the English-speaking communities. Our goal is to have our students achieve full integration and facility in the use of English approximating native-like proficiency—even as the ELLs retain and deepen their knowledge of and appreciation for their own native language. We examine student data histories compiled by both the ENL teacher and classroom teachers, based on project-based assessments, classroom observation anecdotal records as well as standardized test data that determines AYP for ELLs. Specifically, the ENL teacher informally assesses the students as to their level of vocabulary acquisition using English frequency word lists (Dolch, Fry, Fountas & Pinnell), their ability to know and pronounce words correctly, and capacity to write from simple to increasingly complex sentences and paragraphs using correct grammatical structures. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide rigorous and evidence-based curriculum, including English language development for ELLs in the classroom and through a certified ENL teacher. The ENL teacher provides PD to the classroom teachers to suggest appropriate strategies based upon the ELL level. Accordingly, teachers in class use small group differentiated supports. We have an after school program with additional academic support. We have Rosetta Stone for children to use at school and at home as needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] It is the school's policy to engage in intensive, targeted intervention whenever ELLs are not demonstrating sufficient progress. Our ELLs are serviced within the RTI Tier I level of instructional support; none of our ELLs have been placed in Special Education at this time. RTI is used to prevent inappropriate referrals of ELLs into special education, and provide early intervention. Tier I focuses on improvement of core instruction and applies to our ELLs on the Expanding level. Tier II focuses on more intensive interventions within homogeneous groups and applies to our new ELLs at the Entering level; and Tier III is virtually 1:1 intervention, all within the context of family and cultural backgrounds. Only after a comprehensive, multidisciplinary evaluation has taken place should special education be considered. We have invested in additional supportive materials like MindPlay and Rosetta Stone for our Entering ELL students to expose them to the basics of the English language and help develop their skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We will utilize our formative and summative data ( classwork, i ready, Accelerated Reader ). Our continuing ELLs took the NYSESLAT last spring; new admits took the NYSITELL. The returning ELLs scored in the Expanding level; new admit ELLs scored at the Entering level on the NYSITELL. The 2014-2015 school year was our first time having an ELL population. For the 2017-2018 year we will compare trends and continue to create flexible groups to meet the needs of our ELL population. The data for continuing ELLs across all grade levels suggest the following areas are in need of attention: reading comprehension and academic writing. The Entering ELLs need first to acquire the foundational BICS of English. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have 4 sessions with parents per year and will provide the information to parents with the assistance of translators. We utilize the Class Dojo system to communicate with parents daily. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the classroom teachers, and they share observations, strategies and experiences with each other throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Due to the small percentage of our student body that are ELLs, we offer Free Standing ENL, as we do not have the number of students needed to fill a transitional or dual language program, and as ENL is the selection our ELL parents have made. Our Free Standing ENL program will be serving our ELLs. Currently, our five ELLs are in five classrooms, in four different grades. Our ENL provider will be pulling out of these classrooms to meet the mandate of 180-360 minutes each week. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL is the only program model available. A pull-out model of ENL instruction is used, given that the small number of ELLs are spread over several grades. A part-time ENL teacher pulls them into a small, heterogeneous group and provides them with either 180 minutes or 360 minutes per week as the student's level mandates. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program is a pull out model. The ENL teacher is providing small group instruction coordinated with the classroom curricula. The ENL teacher supports classroom lessons by using scaffolding such as modeling, bridging connections between new concepts and prior knowledge, contextualizing by using realia or graphic representations, and schema building by previewing texts or using organizers to prepare for reading a text. Differentiation includes use of graphic organizers, leveled texts, teacher-made templates for writing units, personal word walls for students, and vocabulary development in order to make content comprehensible to all ELLs. During the pull-out periods, all ELL students are learning thematically-based units in the ENL program. Thematic units are aligned with the NYC scope and sequence and Common Core Learning standards. Content areas are embedded in the thematic units and taught simultaneously through the curriculum. Grade appropriate content is taught using these thematic units. Instruction in the ENL program is taught in English through the use of scaffolding strategies. This includes use of scaffolding strategies that include modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, and text re-presentation. Also, collaborative learning activities are used, hands-on activities are planned, technology is infused into the curriculum and various materials are utilized, such as authentic texts, books on tape (The New Heights Program published by Pacific Learning), books in the students' native language, and the internet for support. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are also used. The ENL classroom has a DVD and CD player used to deliver instruction in different modalities by using videos, visuals, audio and interactive 2018-19 CEP 49  writing. In addition, native language support is provided for ELLs with Spanish as their home language. The ENL teacher makes use of Spanish particularly in working with beginners, but quickly moves them into ENL immersion instruction. The school also contains several English-Spanish bilingual classroom staff. Several of the ELLs speak not Spanish but rather Arabic as their home language. Therefore, ENL immersion instruction is most appropriate to this multilingual population. Even so, Arabic-English dictionaries are available for the students as they are capable of using them. The ENL classroom is a student-centered classroom where the ELL community is developed and students are provided with a risk-free environment. ENL methodologies are used by the ENL teacher to make content comprehensible to all students and meet their needs. ELL approaches include, but are not limited to, the Language Experience Approach, where students share an experience and then produce language in response to their first-hand, multi-sensory experience, and the Whole Language Approach, where students develop their language skills in all four modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing. ENL instruction incorporates the components of Balanced Literacy, such as read-alouds, shared readings, interactive writings, guided reading and independent reading and writing. Differentiation of process, product or content is done through the use of small group instruction, use of graphic organizers and supplemental materials. ELLs are given opportunities to develop their language skills in all four modalities through their reading experiences, writing activities, listening activities and opportunity to speak on a daily basis by sharing their work, having discussions with their peers, making presentations and actively participating in class. Assessments are also an important part of the ENL curriculum. Both informal and formal assessments are utilized. These assessments will drive instruction as teachers plan using the information gathered to meet the needs of the students. This year, our school has an inquiry team focusing on the development of writing and further developing academic language in our students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N.A. as the only program at our school is ENL or English by immersion. Home languages for our population are equally divided between Spanish and Arabic. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our progressive, workshop approach provides instruction with multiple entry points and differentiation. In addition, for a SIFE student we would offer opportunities for them to work part time in other classes that are closer to their actual level. The SIFE student would also be mentored by a qualified instructor in addition to the classroom teacher. A SIFE point person would be identified who would know best practices for SIFE education and provide PD opportunities for that person. Currently, no SIFE students are enrolled at the TMALS. b. The plan for Entering students is to provide pull-out service to meet their specific needs, and to provide professional development for the classroom teachers to be able to incorporate ENL methodology into their regular teaching practice. Because newcomers now receive ELA testing after one year, emphasis is placed on BICS and CALPS instruction simultaneously. There is no lag between oral and literacy acquisition in the approach used at TMALS. As soon as the child knows as few as 10 English words, that child not only learns to recognize and speak them, but read and write them as well. Differentiation is accomplished in pacing instruction and scaffolding the content areas to accommodate each student's prior knowledge and interests. From an adult perspective, the learning pace is accelerated for ELLs who are not in special education, precisely because young children normally have the capacity for rapid language acquisition. 2018-19 CEP 50  c. In general, ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of ENL services at the Elementary level are the students who plateau at the same proficiency level for two or more years. When the school has several such students, an ELL inquiry team will be established to focus on academic language development in writing or reading--the two areas that usually constitute the biggest challenges. The goal will be to develop academic language through exposure to various genres in reading and writing, multiple opportunities to practice and assess student progress throughout the year. d. TMALS has no long-term ELLs either last year, or this current academic year. TMALs has 3 Expanding ELLs, based on last year's NYSESLAT. However, whenever such ELLs arise within an Elementary context, it almost always is in the case of students with IEPs. Such students would receive instruction and support as per their IEPs. e. Having a relatively new ELL program, TMALS has no former ELLs in need of continued service. In the future, should they arise, they are mandated to receive 90 minutes of ELL services per week. That time would be focused around supporting preparation for the ELA and whatever other supports the students request such as advanced vocabulary acquisition and reading comprehension. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies teachers use to provide access to content areas to ELL-SWD include pairing students for reading support, templates/prompts for writing activities, visuals, bilingual glossaries in content area subjects, and the opportunity to use math and science texts in some native languages. The ENL teacher, reading specialists, SETTS and classroom teachers collaborate to make goals for students based on their IEPs. The academic intervention team tracks students and their progress based on running records, progress reports, and reading levels. The ENL teacher provides additional support during content area instruction in the classroom. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers communicate with the ENL teachers and grade partners to ensure students are not missing materials covered while they may be pulled out for ENL instruction. Our school received help from the NYCDOE to ensure that students received the appropriate instructional hours. We also use multiple curricular resources. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school offers various intervention programs for ELLs. In ELA, the ENL teacher works with a small group of students to provide targeted intervention in literacy. Student work is periodically assessed and used to plan future instruction. The focus is on writing opinion pieces. Instruction focuses on academic language that can be used to express ones opinion in an educated manner. There will be an emphasis on the reading of information texts that will include argumentative and/or opinion pieces, which can be used as mentor texts. Standard-based rubrics are used to assess students' final pieces. Many of our ELLs also receive one-on-one support with students teachers or tutors that are assigned to the classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? TMALS is expanding on its strong arts and dance programming by adding mindfulness meditation techniques. Students are encouraged to be in touch with their feelings and express them through various culturally sensitive and artistic musical, visual and other nonverbal channels. In these ways, ELLs have nonverbal opportunities to express themselves in the school community. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 2018-19 CEP 51  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs in grades K-5 have equal access to school programs throughout the year. Kindergarten and first grade students have reading recovery, small group push-in instruction, and literacy tutors. These programs include targeted language instruction, reading instruction and enrichment classes. They also take advantage of the school’s after-school programming. It promotes social, emotional, physical, moral and cognitive development of children through creative, project-based learning. All of our after-school programs emphasize literacy and education, providing homework help, tutoring, and the opportunity to use reading and writing as tools for exploration. In addition, we offer a range of enriching experiences, including music, dance, drama, visual arts, sports and recreation, and community service. All after-school services are provided free of charge to participants, and the multicultural staff speak English and Spanish. ELLs also have access to our guidance counselor when necessary and are invited to participate in student council. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. TMALS makes use of SMART boards, interactive and visually interesting language videos, tutorials, software and games. We offer bilingual glossaries for content areas, as well as native language rich texts. There is a library of books on tape to which the ELLs have access. ELLs are also provided with leveled libraries so that students can read appropriate texts for their ability. All classrooms have computers, which are made accessible to the ELLs for further support. We also use a wide variety of graphic organizers and vocabulary lists for ELLs to support them in content-based instruction. This year, the ENL instructor is providing for the students KIndle tablets with a wealth of literature, both fiction and nonfiction, in various genres and levels for them to choose from. Language materials include Continental Press NY TEAM Toolkits: Teaching ELLs for Academic Language Mastery and the Continental Press Picture Dictionary; SnapWords: high-frequency picture words (Child1st Pub.) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The only program offered at the TMALS is ENL, which is English instruction through immersion. While instruction is conducted mainly in English, we are fortunate enough to be able to give support in Spanish since several classroom teachers and staff are bilingual in Spanish and English, and are available to assist when necessary. However, half of our ELL population speaks Arabic. Therefore, immersion is the most egalitarian way to teach English to our multilingual ELL population. Other native languages are supported through the use of parents and students who provide translations, or through the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the DOE. Native language is also supported by providing texts in the student's first language and providing access to the internet for translations. ELLs also have access to bilingual glossaries, dictionaries and a variety of books in their native language as needed. But the emphasis is on teaching English through immersion. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. A child’s age and academic level are both considered when determining the support and resources used. We know it is highly important to use materials that are age-appropriate. We have often used texts written to be high-interest, low-readability when necessary to ensure that instructional needs are being met while respecting the child’s chronological age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA. TMALs does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our ELLs are not officially identified until the school year begins. However, in the first weeks of school, we attempt to foster relationships between families of ELLs. This often begins at the orientation meetings when families make their program choice. Many of our classroom parents often plan potluck school get togethers, which is an excellent way to welcome new families to our school community. 2018-19 CEP 52  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered to any of the TMALS students; in the event there were, they would also be offered to the ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N.A. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of current ELLs will attend a series of workshops (possibly QTEL—Quality Teaching of English Language Learners) in order to increase awareness of teaching strategies specific to ELLs. Professional development for staff who work with ELLs include TC workshops. Professional development is greatly supported and encouraged by administration. Teachers are able to share what they have learned from attending various PD workshops so other teachers may implement some of those strategies into their own lesson planning. In-house PD by the ENL Teacher will be provided. Workshop topics would include: These workshops would utilize material from the following texts: Pauline Gibbons, Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning, 2nd ed. (Heineman, 2014), and Kama Einhorn, Easy & Engaging ESL Activities...for Every Classroom (Scholastic, 2001). The ENL Teacher will provide additional bibliographic resources to the rest of the faculty that includes, "Understanding Language: Key Principles for ELL Instruction," found on the Stanford University website. (http://ell.stanford.edu/policy) Also, "Application of Common Core State Standards for English Language Learners," (http://www.corestandards.org/assets/application-for-english-learners.pdf). The PD opportunities publicized in OELL News by the NYC DOE will also be made available. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL Teacher will conduct PD with staff as described above in #1. Teachers also participate in TC, QTEL and OELL workshops. Our focus continues to be the development of academic language, using the text, Building Academic Language by Jeff Zwiers, as a reference. Training for all staff is accomplished by sharing resources, materials, and insights from professional development workshops in which ENL teachers participate. Records are maintained by having sign-in sheets for all PD's. In addition, the ENL teacher will receive 50% of required PD hours dedicated to language acquisition through District 5 and Manhattan Borough scheduled PD workshops for ENL teachers. Our ENL teacher is also an active member of TESOL, the professional organization of ESL/bilingual teachers, which conducts regular meetings. 2018-19 CEP 53  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? A meeting is scheduled annually for a formal review of a student's progress with the parents. It includes the ENL Teacher and classroom teacher. It is conducted in the language stated as preferred on the HLIS form. If a translator is requested on the HLIS form, a translator of the parent's home language is included. The meeting agenda includes the goals of the ENL program, the student's language development progress and proficiency assessment results, and the language development needs across the content areas. TMALS uses attendance records using existing procedures. The NYS Education Department's Parent's Backpack Guide to the Common Core State Standards and Parents' Bill of Rights for NYS ELLs is made available. The ENL Teachers make themselves available for regular ELL parent meetings every time that parent teacher meetings are on the school-wide calendar. They are in touch with parents by phone, email, Dojo texting and personal contact at the beginning and ending of each school day that they are in session. Often when classroom teachers schedule conferences with parents, the ENL teacher is also invited to participate. Our school is a community based school, in that ENL teachers interact with ELL parents in their home environment, such as frequenting the local businesses that these parents often run. They get to know the families of the students and provide instructional insights to parents on a regular basis. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The TMALS parents are highly involved in all aspects of the school’s life and the parents of ELLs are welcome to join in. For example, parents are engaged with Harlem Grown, an award-winning urban farm cooperative which tills the soil of abandoned lots in Harlem. Parents prepare food for the school's annual Harvest event, providing dishes from around the world. The ELL parents are treated as an especially important part of expanding the schools' diversity and richness. Every month there are parent workshops and clubs specifically organized for the grandparents, dads and Moms on the Move, a physical movement club. There is Parent Engagement Night, and Parent/Teacher Night. The DOE flyer is sent home for ELL events for parents in the city. All parents are invited to visit classes to observe or to volunteer at school in the library or art room. They serve on committees that take action, consider policy and get things done. Parents of ELLs are equally welcome and are offered support based on their native language. They will be involved in the school's multicultural fair, which will include parent-made dishes from around the world. In summary, the parents of ELLs are especially welcome to be an integral part of our multicultural, cooperative community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dawn Brooks Decosta, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Thurgood Marshall Academy Lowe School DBN: 05M318 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Dawn Brooks DeCosta Principal Kerri Ayn Seow Assistant Principal Craig Frierson Parent Coordinator Constance Benson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Johanna Tejeda Parent Debra Turner/3rd grade Teacher/Subject Area Kerri Ann Francis/ SETTS Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Patricia Butts School Counselor Danika Rux Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 10/10/17 2018-19 CEP 56 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Thurgood Marshall Academy Superintendent: DanikaRux DBN: 05M318 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Patricia Butts Guidance Counselor yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The NYCDOE Home Language Surveys will be used as the primary source of data for language needs of the school. We will also review reports in the ATS sysyem, viewed as the HLIS report. Both the RELL report and RHLA reports would be used as sources of data as we assess the needs of our poulation. Parents will be informed accordingly. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 57  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred The parents' preferred language is Spanish and English / (we Arabic 1 Arabic 0.45 Arabic 1 have one Arabic speaking families but the parents have requested to share information verbally in English. ) French 0 French 0 French 3 Mandingo 1 Mandingo Mandingo 0.45 0 Percent Oral Arabic 0.45 French 1.36 English 214 Spanish 4 English 97.27 Spanish 1.82 Mandingo English 213 0 Spanish 3 English 96.82 Spanish 1.36 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families ELT Application- September 15, 2017 Parent Handbook- November 1, 2017 September 6, 2017 PTA Information-Ongoing Monthly Fliers and permission slips September 2017-June 2018 Transportation Information September 2017-June 2018 Monthly Calendars September 2017-June 2018 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff and parent translators will be present at the September 6th orientation, at parent engagement nights and parent teacher conferences. Translated documents will be sent to families who prefer correspondence in their home language Translated documents will be sent to families who prefer correspondence in their home language Translated documents will be sent to families who prefer correspondence in their home language 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Engagement Nights- September 13, 2017 May 23, 2018 PTA Meetings Monthly Monthly September 2017- June 2018 Parent Teacher Conferences 2 times yearly November 16, 2017 March 15, 2018 Parent Workshops Dates TBD interpretation service(s)? Staff/parent translators will provide support. Information going home will be translated. The Class dojo system provides translation on all messages Staff/parent translators will provide support. Information going home will be translated. The Class dojo system provides translation on all messages Staff/parent translators will provide support. Information going home will be translated. The Class dojo system provides translation on all messages Staff/parent translators will provide support. Information going home will be translated. The Class dojo system provides translation on all messages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize a variety of methods to contact families that includes, phone blasts, remind system blasts and Class Dojo messaging. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Principal will hold PD for school staff on language access or outreach (i.e. via email, letter or in-person announcement) to inform staff on language access requirements and resources Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 59   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have monthly meetings with our parents. The Parent Coordinator has also held workshops and provided emails of opportunities to inform parents of various multi-lingual programs within the city. Parents are also paired with suportive families that can help share information and details about various NYCDOE events and school happenings. Notes were sent home and shared updates are given to families electronically as well. When the school needs to provide services to families that speak languages other than english we will use available parties within the school community as well as the DOE translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey will be provided in Spanish and Arabic to families who require it Monthly PTA Meeting reporting Informal conversations with families. 2018-19 CEP 60 
