2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M322 School Name: MIDDLE SCHOOL 322 Principal: ERICA ZIGELMAN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 06M322 Middle School 322 310600010322 6-8 4600 Broadway New York, NY 10040 (212)-304-0853 Phone Number: (212)-567-3016 Fax: Erica Zigelman EZigelman@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Erica Zigelman Jevada Wright Amelia Florian Dennis Ryan Berkis Garcia MigdaliaTorres Geographical District: 06 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway New York NY 10040 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917)-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: (917) 521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave. New York, NY YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 646.470.0721 917-339-1765 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Erica Zigelman JevadaWright Amelia Florian Berkis Garcia Dennis Ryan VeronikaKiss BerkisGarcia Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EmiliaZapata Adriana Mercedes Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Salome Ureña Leadership Academy embraces the cultural diversity of our students and staff, using those assets in continuing to expand our knowledge, understanding and viewpoint beyond the classroom doors. We seek to provide a warm and welcoming learning environment, supporting the academic, social and emotional needs of all who enter this school. Through rigorous academic curriculum we prepare all students to excel in a competitive, 21st century global workforce. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is located in Washington Heights. 82% of our student population is eligible for reduced or free lunch. 87% of our students are recent immigrants from the the Dominican Republic. The school is a Children’s Aid Society Community School with wrap-around services (from medical care to mental health) supported by a 21st Century Grant, as well as a wide array of after school options, such as basketball, enrichment, robotics, mock trial, debate team, Mathematics regents. We are part of the DOE's MSQI initiative, which helps us raise student engagement, and therefore achievement. We collaborate with Chinese educators from Shenzhen during their annual visit to our school, where we share best practices and learn from each other. We maintain our strong ties to the community by having relationships with local businesses. For example, our annual prom is held at a local venue. We receive our funding through the Office Of Community Schools. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 82% of our students face economic hardship. 78% are current or former English Language Learners. Many students will require support with literacy and numeracy to reach the expectations of the standards at their grade level. 28% of our students are in temporary housing. We have over 21% Students with Disabilities with 46% of them are also identified as English Language Learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our teachers and administrators focused on instruction in the past year. Teachers earned ratings of effective or higher more 80% of the time from every evaluator. The standards we targeted showed even better results. The school earned top "Framework Scores" in Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family-Community Ties. We had high scores for our school environment, teacher collaboration, and student achievement. Our most recent Quality Review agreed. The school earned top ratings for its school culture, teacher collaboration, and curriculum as well as Teacher Pedagogy. Our framework scores show us there is still room for improvement on the administrative side. To attack the weakness, we will include more staff in decision-making wherever possible. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M322 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 310 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 91.9% % Reduced Lunch 39.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 94.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.35 7% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 38 39 92.3% 3.2% 20.6% 3.2% 0.6% 0.0% 4 37% 5.5 21.4% 36% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a well-developed for 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, 2.2 Assessment. The reviewer noted that "curricula and tasks across grades and subject areas challenge all students including English Language Learners (ELLs) to think critically and incorporate real-world applicability", and "Rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills are embedded so that all learners demonstrate their thinking". The reviewer also praised our pedagogy, noting that "across the vast majority of classrooms, teaching practices consistently reflect the schoolwide beliefs that students learn best when they are engaged in hands-on, active learning experiences with real- world connections" . She also saw evidence of high levels of continuous assessment when she wrote "teachers check for understanding, adjust the lessons, and students self-assess against an assessment criterion". Our 2017-2018 School Survey also attests to these findings. 86% of our students said that they know what their teacher wants them to learn in class; the expectations are clear. In addition, 100 % of teachers of all subjects said that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. 2. When looking at our Mathematics state exam scores from 2017-2018 we noticed that as a newly consolidated school, 94 of our currently registered 390 students scored between a 1.84 and a 1.97. For ELA this number is 25. It is imperative that we take action and provide our students with the necessary services, so they pass the test this year. We will contact the parents of these students and inform them of our Saturday Academy and after school programs. Teachers will also be made aware of these students, so they can pay special attention to their needs during instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 12  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will have received an effective or highly effective rating in Engaging Students in Learning (3b), Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3c), Using Assessment in Instruction (3d) and Designing Coherent Instruction (1e) as determined by a review of official observation data recorded in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Direct Professional Learning Communities toward Engaging Students in Learning (3b), Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3c) and Designing Coherent Instruction (1e) beginning in September, TCRWP consultants will provide direct support for content teachers, ELA teachers and teachers of ELLS and SWDs including model lessons, departmental debriefing, etc. The Literacy Coach will work with teachers who are new to TC by conducting friendly classroom visits, co-planning sessions and teaching model lessons. Monitor implementation of the key components through formal and informal classroom observations, using these evaluations as formative assessment toward targeted professional development while providing direct feedback to address areas of necessary development. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students, all subgroups. September, ongoing. PD team, classroom teachers, Literacy Coach, administration. All subgroups, all subjects. September, ongoing. PD team, classroom teachers, administration. Arrange classroom visits of exemplary instruction (teachers consistently rated “Highly Effective” in target components) with debriefing and reflection. Educators requiring development. October-May PD team, classroom teachers. Include topics related to engagement, questioning and discussion, and lesson planning during weekly content area meetings. Educators October-May Teachers, Coaches. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will reach out about after-school, holiday and weekend programming for students with multiple forms of contact, including Jupiter Ed (email and text), School Messenger (telephone), flier and direct calling. we will offer continuous workshops for parents in collaboration with Children's Aid Society. Parent Association events will provide seminars on key issues again in collaboration with Children's Aid Society. Due to the consolidation with IS 218, there will be a strong emphasis on bringing all parents together. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal we will work closely with our PD Support from our Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Consultants. Professional Development will be monitored and adjusted based on teacher needs. We will cover teachers to attend labsites and debrief sessions, teachers will also attend offsite PD Calendar at Teachers College. We will also use our PD Time which is built into teacher schedules to conduct labsite and debrief sessions with our consultants. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, with 40% of observations complete, the PD Team will assess teacher performance, expecting 65% of teachers to have received Effective or higher ratings in our three target areas: ● Engaging Students in Learning (3b) ● Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3c) ● Designing Coherent Instruction (1e) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance teacher ratings as well as minutes and agendas from the relevant meetings. Coaching notes from our TC Consultants. Coaching notes from our school-based literacy coach and data manager. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? For three years, the 21st Century Grant and the School Innovation Fund have helped us support our students. In 2017-2018, severe incidents recorded on Jupiter Ed fell from 49 to 37 per week, a 26% drop. In some areas, we have established traditions that will continue. We hold events that bring the whole school together. We now celebrate student successes with formal routines that we did not years before. We have a guidance counselor who can take on crucial counseling needs. We also have two full time deans this school year. They will provide teachers and students with the support they need to create an inclusive school community for all stakeholders. We are also fortunate that the 21st Century Grant continues to give our students the chance to explore the arts. One of our main goals is to maintain our success as funding changes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the results of our 2019 NYC School Survey will show that more than 75% of people respond positively to department-selected questions about whether the school has a Supportive Environment. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish an Events Committee and bring teachers on board who are from the recent consolidation. Staff, Students September 2018 Principal, Teachers, Grade APs Track student conduct on a class by class basis with grade-based tabulation and periodic reward events. These events will be decided by the events committee in collaboration with the school student council. All Students September - June 2019 Hold "Honor Roll Breakfast" events with parents for two or more marking periods. All Students September - June 2019 Hold a major school-wide luncheon before the Winter Recess (Winterfest) with staff, parent and student involvement. This event will occur in early December. All Staff and Students December 2018. Hold a culminating "Honor Roll Trip" for students who reach the school's honor roll in three of our four marking periods. All students June 2019 One teacher identified per class. Data Manager (online tabulation). Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association President Events Committee, Parent Association President, Physical Education Department, Staff, etc.. School administrators, events committee, grade teams. Hold a a Hispanic Heritage Event to celebrate the diverse backgrounds of our ELL population. Organize a field trip to the Statue of Liberty to learn about immigration. All students October Staff Teachers 2019 May 2019 Students from our transitional bilingual and dual language classes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  Jupiter Ed will provide a steady stream of behavioral alerts, weekly grade reports, health updates and positive messages from classrooms across the school. Parents will always know how their children are performing academically and socially. School Messenger, fliers, and Jupiter Ed will provide bilingual notice of all reward activities, honor roll events, and other key community events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The administration and implementation of the action plan will require the adjustment of classroom routines and normal teacher collaboration time. We will adjust the daily flow and to allow for the special event to occur for that day only. Although some reward events will require only time, the remainder will be funded with school-wide projects funding and 21st Century funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our events committee will meet twice monthly with the student council, reporting to administration and grade-based teacher teams which will also meet twice monthly, allowing the planning for these events and transparent tracking of said events. The events will be included in our public-facing school calendar and its associated app. By the end of February 2019 our events committee, student council, teacher leads, and administration will have met twice a month and reported on the effectiveness of student recognition and community building events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A points-based conduct monitoring sheet is printed daily. Totals are shared and tabulated in a shared Google Sheet on our school's G-Suite account in advance of each event. Points thresholds will be promulgated to staff and students with progress posted by the grade administrators. Our events committee will meet biweekly, coordinating the planning of upcoming events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our school's systematic collaborative model of professional development was highlighted in our 2017-2018 quality review. Teacher team meetings were singled out for praise. The reviewer found teacher teams (4.2) to be our Area of Celebration. She noted, "all teachers collaborate in grade-level and content teams using the ATLAS protocol to analyze student work to promote the schoolwide goal of writing across the curriculum, resulting in schoolwide instructional coherence," and "distributed leadership practices are embedded so that teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school". Also, according to our NYC School Survey, 92 % of teachers think that at the school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.We wish to capitalize on this area of strength to improve cooperation among teachers, the effectiveness of professional development and the smoothness of school administration overall. 2. Since our school has just undergone consolidation with 218, it is our goal for this year to integrate new staff members into our school community. We will do this by providing leadership opportunities to all staff members, making sure that there is a balance between teachers from both schools. Our Mathematics and Literacy Coaches and consultants will work with our new teachers and provide them with the additional support they need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a team of six teacher leaders from all three grades will have completed 18 twice-monthly meetings to coordinate the activities of all teachers in Professional Learning Communities. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish a lead teacher team, including two experienced teacher-representatives from each of our three grades. Teachers September 2018 Administrators, teacher grade teams. Integrate professional development into teacher team lead meetings. All teachers, all grades Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administrators and grade leaders Establish a first set of professional learning communities based on teacher needs and interests, each of which is lead by an experienced teacher. All teachers, all grades October. 2018 Teacher Lead Team Establish a second set of professional learning communities based on teacher needs and interests, each of which is lead by an experienced teacher. All teachers, all grades January. 2019 Teacher Lead Team Establish a third set of professional learning communities based on teacher needs and interests, each of which is lead by an experienced teacher. All teachers, all grades March 2019 Teacher Lead Team Our ENL and Special Education Coordinators will address the needs of our high needs population during our weekly curriculum planning meetings and grade meetings. All teachers September 2019 ENL Coordinator, Special Education Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In open houses and parent-teacher conferences (as per the DOE calendar), we will provide parents with a clear picture of both the performance of the children and our teaching strategies, making ourselves available to answer questions about how parents can support their children from home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The scope of these activities fits within the contractual obligations of the teaching contract and should only require very occasional additional funding when and if texts are required for a specific professional learning community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, through minutes of the team's meetings will demonstrate that the team has met at least six times. Minutes of the team meeting Surveys of the teachers will be crucial to the planning and evaluation of this goal. Teachers will be surveyed to establish needs and interests that will be focused upon as well as to determine the effectiveness of the work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys and Advance ratings of teacher performance will be the backbone of progress assessment. Some survey questions will parallel key items in the Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership sections of the NYC School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a well-developed in 3.4, High Expectations. The reviewer wrote that "new teachers receive mentoring and differentiated support from administrators and colleagues,aligned to the school’s instructional foci of writing across the curriculum with connections to the Danielson Framework for Teaching" and "content-specific coaches and staff developers provide teachers with feedback on implementing hands-on activities for science, implementing TCRWP components". 2. According to our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, "79% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students how to advocate for themselves, and "79% of teachers say that adults at their school teach critical thinking skills to students." To foster our students' social emotional literacy, our two full-time deans, guidance counselor and physiologist will work with our students to develop such skills. These suggestions point to the need for school leaders to monitor evidence-based systems to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined elsewhere in this document. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative cabinet will have met ten times to review SCEP goals and relevant data towards achieving our goals. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Identify key metrics necessary for tracking and SCEP goals. Post SCEP goals in a dominant position in cabinet meeting room. Establish a template for progress monitoring. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration September 2018 Administration September 2018-June 2019 Principal , data manager, APs. Data Manager, Principal Principal , data manager, APs. Prepare timely reports of key metrics. Administration Ongoing Data manager, APs. Report to teacher leader team to so that teacher PLCs will focus on areas where intervention is warranted. Administration September 2018-June 2019 Principal , data manager, APs. ENL and Special Education teachers will receive targeted professional development through TCRWP to address the needs of all students. ENL and Special Education Teachers Ongoing Principal, Literacy Coach Our two full-time deans will monitor student interactions through Jupitergrades. Deans Ongoing Deans, Data Manager, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement in this goal will be achieved by presenting status reports on the SCEP goals to meetings of the School Leadership Team throughout the year. These public meetings which include the parent association chair will provide transparency. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  This goal would require only changes to existing structures and a slight re-purposing of administrators' time and a new focus for one of the standing meeting of the administrative cabinet. No additional funding seems necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, the administrative cabinet will audit its progress, assessing their decisions about which metrics are being analyzed and what interventions have been attempted. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The cabinet will require DRP scores, Wilson assessments, and mathematics unit assessments on all students in the targeted subgroups in literacy and numeracy. They will need reports from Advance to monitor the progress toward PD goals, and, finally, they will require printed reports of parent access to the Jupiter Ed system in order to track its use. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a well-developed for high expectations. The reviewer noted "parents are aware of their children’s academic progress through online platforms, quarterly progress reports, and robocalls regarding school events such as honor roll ceremonies", and "parents mentioned their involvement in workshops on nutrition, navigating through online resources for parents of newcomers, support of counselors on the high school admissions process, and the online grading platform." According to our 2017-2018 School Survey, "95% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance." 2. The school serves a primarily Hispanic community where over 80% of families live in Spanish outside the school and over 40% of students were born outside the United States. The work of staff and support agencies to bridge the inevitable cultural and language divide is ongoing.One tool the school has adopted is the online system, Jupiter Ed. This online learner management system facilitates two-way bilingual communication between staff, students and teachers, alerting parents to events logged by teachers, provides reports on student progress toward standards and keeps an ongoing record that can be accessed anywhere. By the end of 2018, 281 out of 330 had logged into our online progress monitoring software, Jupiter. 64% of parents and 99% of students logged into our online system to monitor behavior and academic performance. Teachers sent 2,110 alerts of behavioral and academic concern to families. The school sent received 1673 "Good Behavior" alerts that year. As powerful as this system can be, achieving a high level of participation requires a concerted effort on the part of teachers and administrators. Families need training. Students need encouragement. Contact information must be constantly checked and updated. When this system really works, students can take charge of their learning and parents can have a comprehensive understanding of where their child needs support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 25  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of parents & students (combined) will have accessed our Jupiter Ed grade book as part of maintaining an ongoing, comprehensive understanding of the social and academic life of their children. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will offer continuous training to families with a staff expert, interpreters, and computers with refreshments provided. Parents Usage reports will be posted throughout the school and online with accompanying instructions for teachers to support parents and children in logging in. Collect parent contact information (email and cell phone) at every parent teacher conferences, parent meetings and whenever parents come to the parent coordinator’s desk. Parents, Staff, Students, Teachers Parents Instructional videos and handouts will be posted online, providing quick, simple instructions for routine, relevant tasks in Jupiter Ed. Teachers Our data manager will download, report and post usage rates divided by class and grade. Parents, Staff, Students, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent coordinator & data manager. Data Manager Parent Coordinator, Data Manager Data Manager Data Manager Update preferred language in Jupitergrades for our non-English speaking families. Parents, Students Ongoing Data Manager 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid Society Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use parent coordinator monies to host ongoing workshops in collaboration with our CBO; Children’s Aid Society to further work with our parents on honing their Jupiter Grades Skills. Our Data Manager will provide this work in collaboration with our CBO as well as our Technology Teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, through Jupitergrades workshops conducted throughout the school year at events, such as Meet The Teacher Night and Parent-Teacher Conferences, combined usage rates will have reached at least 90%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. JupiterEd login stat report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student State Test Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Direct skills instruction by certified teachers (supported by New York Ready instructional material recommended by TCRWP consultant). Widespread use of blended learning through iLearnNYC (allowing greater personalization Modified schedule, allowing smaller During the school day, after school, classes and flexible, needs-based holidays. groupings. · Mixed-grade TBE ELL groupings by language acquisition level with co-teachers to support higher needs students. · Sixteen days of small group instruction in “Saturday Academy” small group instruction (9am-12pm 90 minutes ELA instruction). · Three days of small group 2018-19 CEP 29  Mathematics Student State Test Scores Direct skills instruction by certified teachers (supported by New York Ready instructional material). instruction during March Recess (9am-12pm, 105 minutes ELA instruction). · After School small group intervention (3:15-5:15pm, 60 minutes ELA instruction). Small-Group, pull-out RTI with During the school day, after school, highest needs students. holidays. · Sixteen days of small group instruction in “Saturday Academy” small group instruction (9am-12pm 90 minutes ELA instruction). · Three days of small group instruction during March Recess (9am-12pm, 105 minutes ELA instruction). · After School small group 2018-19 CEP 30  Science Teacher recommendations and grades Literacy strategies such as graphic organizers intended to increase transfer of skills will be shared on a continuous basis. Social Studies Teacher recommendations and grades Literacy strategies such as graphic organizers intended to increase transfer of skills will be shared on a continuous basis At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPT Team, Teacher Referrals SIF Grant, Success Mentor and Advocate Counselor intervention (3:15-5:15pm, 60 minutes ELA instruction). Cross-curricular collaboration with ELA will focus on comprehension and writing skills for this content area. Literacy strategies such as graphic organizers will be utilized on a continuous basis Cross-curricular collaboration with ELA will focus on comprehension and writing skills for this content area. Literacy strategies such as graphic organizers will be utilized on a continuous basis. Small group and one to one meetings throughout the school day During the school day and on Saturdays During the school day only Weekdays during the school hours. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 114 students We are providing all after school, Saturday Programs and our guidance counselor meets with students for additional support. Students will also receive school supplies and uniforms. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32 We will provide welcome to school packages to all students. This will include basic school supplies, a book bag and uniform shirts. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administration will work with DHR to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified, form partnerships with local colleges to identify new staff and attend Central borough-wide hiring fairs. We have been part of the pilot program from the Office of Human Resources which has worked with the administration on hiring and retaining highly qualified teachers. The school makes a special effort to invite teachers into many decision-making processes, including the direction of professional development, the hiring of new staff members, and the planning of schedules. Teachers who are new to the school will receive targeted professional development opportunities. Our Math and Literacy Coaches will work with these teachers to identify areas of celebration and growth and to make sure they receive the required supports. Our MSQI Coordinator will also work with teachers and model strategies for them, which they can incorporate into their lessons. Consultants from Teachers College, Math , Special Education, Social Studies, and Science consultants will also work with our teachers. Due to the consolidation, we have quite a few new faces. Besides giving them support with their teaching, we are also making sure that they are incorporated into the fabric of the school by giving them leadership opportunities, such as becoming grade team leaders. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 34  All teachers participate in grade and subject-based collaborations that both provide collegiality and professional development. We have a long-standing weekly new teacher PD session facilitated by the principal to bring new teachers into the school community. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project provides curricular and pedagogical support in reading and writing for teachers in the ELA department (and across the content areas), including on-site help from consultants as well as off-site "calendar days" and study groups. In 2017-2018, CEI-PEA lent their expertise to the whole staff in working with the affective domain and, more specifically, to teachers working with students with special needs. These foundations are now a part of our school culture. This work will continue throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The school promotes and facilitates CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives. The school integrates professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support Parents are engaged in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the MOSL team worked together to choose the right assessment measures. Our UFT Chapter Leader (an experienced content trainer in mathematics) led the team. He led training sessions on making selections, scoring protocols, etc.. The school's data manager and the MOSL committee help teachers turn assessments into instruction. The school is also part of the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). We assess students in reading with Questar's Degrees of Reading Power test. The results are reported by the data manager and the teacher lead for MSQI. Our Coaches work with the academic departments to develop an assessment calendar for the academic school year. Coherent assessments are given to all of the students in each grade. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 36  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 212,775.00 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local NA 21,060.00 20,430 2,209,490.00 X NA N/A X X Section 5A, Part 4a; Section 5B, Section 5C, Part 4a; N/A N/A Section 5B, Part 4a; Section 5A, Part 4a; Section 5B, Part 4a; Section 5C, Part 4a; Section 5E, Part 4a; 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 37   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. M.S 322, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. MS 322 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS 322, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CAS Services and Expanded School Time Programs are offered during and after the school day, during holidays and summer vacations which are consistent with the schools’ philosophy and core instructional programs. These programs are available to all students and are designed to be comprehensive so that students will find support for their academic, social, health, psychological, physical, vocational and emotional needs in one place. ACADEMIC SUPPORTopportunities during the expanded school time seek to reinforce the school day curricula. These offerings include open library hours, target academic intervention sessions, homework help, tutoring sessions, and supplementary Department of Education class offerings. There are also holidays and summer programs; the latter designed to prevent summer learning loss. ATTENDANCE SUPPORTis offered at the partnering schools for students who are identified by the principals with Chronic Absenteeism. The Success Mentor will co-chair weekly attendance meetings with the school’s Pupil Personnel Team that includes the attendance teacher and guidance counselor who works in tandem to create an action plan focused in-part on improving the attendance of students especially those identified as chronically absent. The Success Mentor will make phone calls and follow up with parents, and they will meet with students one-to-one and in groups. ACADEMIC, SOCIAL AND VOCATIONALenrichment opportunities include STEM, leadership training, Target Academic Intervention, Spelling Bee to increase students’ vocabulary which is a focus on M.S 322’s instructional focus in SY 2018-19, community service projects, peer tutoring, journalism and yearbook clubs – which are also tied in to the schools’ instructional focus to increase students writing across the four core content areas, and art clubs. These offerings provide a creative approach to the subjects of literacy, math and science by integrating creative arts, experimental science and analytical games. DANCE, ART, THEATER AND CULTURAL opportunities include Robotics, drama, modern, cultural and hip-hop dance classes, piano, graphic design, drumming, archery, chorus, self-care, SMART Girls, Passport to Manhood, and several fine arts classes. PHYSICAL AND HEALTHactivities such as the sports and recreational leagues (girls’ and boys’ basketball, soccer for success, volleyball), clinics and tournaments and open gym time are available year round through the afterschool, 2018-19 CEP 46  holiday and summer programs. Town meetings are held to give students an opportunity to voice their opinions on difficult peer issues such as dating, domestic violence, gangs and sexuality. HEALTH SERVICES FOR STUDENTS, services and programs are designed with the goal of removing barriers to learning and promoting positive youth development. Students have access to in-house holistic care through a Student Wellness Center which has a mental health unit, medical and dental clinics, and a crisis intervention team. FOR PARENTS, academic enrichment takes place through parent literary classes, as well as through several adult educational programs (ESL, GED/HSED, computer, citizenship) that are offered throughout the year. Social and cultural opportunities such as the Dominican Cultural Festival and holiday celebrations are organized through the Family Resource Room. For parents, vocational and community development is provided through entrepreneurial classes and advocacy opportunities such as the annual Afterschool Lobby Day in Albany. Physical and health programs that focus on healthy family development, sex education and relationships are offered, with options for local referrals for mental and physical health concerns. Emergency help is available through the New York Times Neediest Fund. TEENS AND COMMUNITY MEMBERS, The Teen Program brings together teens from the community and recent Salomé Ureña Campus alumni for academic and recreation support to the middle school participants. Other Programs and Services The Salomé Ureña Campus also offers a comprehensive array of programs and services for students and their parents, as well as recent alumni and community members. Accordingly, it is considered the “hub” of activity and support for the entire community. The CS strategy is integrated in the academic instruction at M.S. 322 in the following ways:  the Community School Director (CSD) or designee participates in the SLT, Safety Committee, BRT, profession development sessions, and Pupil Personnel Team meetings  Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in literacy is provided to a cohort of 20 – 25 sixth and seventh graders in the after school program who are functioning below grade level. All students in the Children’s Aid after school are assessed using the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment – mini (DESSA-mini) to predict early warning signs of problem behaviors at the individual student level and create intervention plans that supports students’ social-emotional wellness and academic focus. Youth assessed with the DESSA-mini receive a single raw score that places them in one of three categories: Strength, Typical and Need for Instruction. The strategies used to address cases found to score in the “Needs” category include “Action Planning Conferencing” sessions, and special referrals for additional support, as needed. 2018-19 CEP 47  Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. The afterschool program will target new arrivals who are English Language Learners. By attending enrichment activities on Tuesdays and Thursdays students will develop their English language and Math skills. The following chart illustrates the number of students currently enrolled at MS 322 who are ELLs (157 students). By the end of the program in June 2018 80% of the students would show progress on the NYSESLAT state exam. Newly arrived Entering Emerging Transitional Expanding total 6th Graders 7thGraders 8thGraders 9 17 16 6 7 15 5 5 6 7 12 16 13 9 14 40 50 67 Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The Children’s Aid Society Community School Director and M.S. 322 administrator/liaison will meet monthly in efforts to ensure they are maintaining a collaborative partnership and meeting programmatic expectations, that students are receiving both academic and social emotional support through self-awareness. All of these components work in conjunction to help increase students’ academic capacity. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Children’s Aid Target Population Scope of Service SY17-18 SMART Goal 6thto 8thgrade participants Expanded Learning Time - Academic By June 2019 ALL 6-8thgrade students that were in the T.A.I group with low assessment 2018-19 CEP 48  -Target Academic Intervention (T.A.I) - Literacy and Math - STEM Children’s Aid 6th – 8th grade participants Expanded Learning Time - Clubs Children’s Aid Urban Arts Children’s Aid Children’s Aid 6th-8th grade English Language Learners 6th – 8th grade participants 6th– 12thgraders in the Community School campus Parents of participants enrolled Go! Chef-Cooking -Youth Basketball League -SMART Girls -Passport to Manhood Expanded Learning Time- Tutoring Math and ELA tutoring Chorus Film Dance School-Based Health Clinic: -Medical -Mental Health -Dental 1- Parent workshops - (Education, Social Emotional Learning, Leadership, Vocation, Community events) 2-Adult Educational/Literacy-ABE, ESL, TASC/GED scores in ELAand/or Math will show gains in one or both subjects during the post assessment. By the end of each cycle (each runs for 18 week) 75% of students enrolled in clubs will develop a skill based on the club they selected. By June 2019, 80% of ELL students attending will show progress on the NYSESLAT exam. To expose participants to the arts while they discover their own interest and talent. By June 2019, 85% of MS 322 students will be enrolled in our School Based Health Clinic to receive medical, mental health and dental services. Children’s Aid and MS 322 will work collaboratively to engage parents and by June 2019, 70% of MS 322 parents will have attended at least ONE of the workshops offered by the Children’s Aid. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 49  The resources needed to implement the services provided by MS 322 and CAS include 4 teachers (2 Math, 2 ELA), 5 Facilitators for clubs and 3 resident artists (through Urban Arts) providing the ‘Story Studio” club, and materials aligned to the CCLS. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. School - MS322 will hold monthly meetings with CAS to discuss and strategize how student's growth will be monitored to ensure progress. One of the assistant principals will be the liaison between the school and the CBO. In terms of the implementation process each student will be assessed based on the NYSESLAT level achieved Spring 2018. We will look at each modality attending to determine which needs to be developed further to help the student move up to the next level. The students with the greatest needs of growth will participate in the CBO’s Afterschool small group Target Academic Intervention component. We will also conduct a professional development workshop to familiarize the CBO staff with the NYSESLAT language, and understand the assessment process so that it can be addressed in daily interaction in every component of afterschool - the Learning Zone (STEM, WORD-Bee, Target Academic Intervention, and Literacy), and art, music, leadership, and recreation clubs. 2018-19 CEP 50  Students being given assessments in both academics and social emotional learning will help identify the needs of each individual student so that the appropriate services are provided. In addition, the lead CBO and the partnering school have established emergency protocols which will contribute to personalizing the needs of all students. To support the Community School model we have a Family Room which is located on the first floor. The Family room is where there is a menu of workshops being provided, Monday through Friday from 9-2pm, to all parents in the community. We also collaborate with the school to facilitate specific workshops around Education, Leadership, Vocation/entrepreneurship, Services and entitlements and together we host Community Collaboration events. The school liaison, the AP and the Community School Director are tentatively scheduled to meet every Wednesday at 10:30am to discuss and analyze trends and manage individual students. The meeting will take place at the CBO’s main office room 123. Findings from these meetings will be disseminated to staff to ensure that student’s needs are addressed and that they achieve their target goals. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. The school liaison is committed to supervising the academic component of the after school expanded learning on Tuesdays and Thursday. In addition, he will meet with the community school director (CSD) on Wednesdays. 2. CBO will be sharing data gather in the after school program and important social and emotional development information of the student that may benefit daily learning in school. 3. PD – orientating each other on understanding the component of our work. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The resources needed to implement the services provided by MS 322 and CAS include 4 teachers (2 Math, 2 ELA), 5 Facilitators for clubs and 3 resident artists (through Urban Arts) providing the ‘Story Studio” club, and the CARS resource books (Comprehensive Assessment of Reading Strategies). Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All components of the program will be up and fully running by Monday, October 5, 2018 and will run through June 21, 2019 between the hours of 3:00pm and 6:00pm. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In reviewing our AMAO data only 49.7% of our students achieved proficiency while 8.6% achieved progress. Our state target for achieving proficiency was 66.7% and for state progress was 15%. This year in order to help our students who have diverse language needs middle school 322 will be offering two supplemental programs: a weekly Saturday Academy program and a twice-weekly after-school enrichment program. Saturday Academy On Saturdays beginning December 8, 2018 throughout June 8, 2019 for a total of 20 Sessions. The program will run from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm. The program will run as follows: 9:00 - 10:30 6th Grade ELA Group 1 16th Grade Math Group 2 Mixed Grade NLA Group 1 (18-TR+EX) (17-EN + 6-TR+EX) (9 New Arrivals 6-Grade) 7th Grade ELA Group 1 7th Grade Math Group 2 (24-EN) (17-EX + 7-EM-TR) 8th Grade ELA Group 1 8th Grade Math Group 2 (17-EN + 7-I) (17-A + 7-I) 10:30-12:00 6th Grade ELA Group 2 6th Grade Math Group 1 Mixed Grade NLA Group 2 (17-EN + 6-EM-TR) (18-EX) (11 New Arrivals 7-8 Grade) 7th Grade ELA Group 2 7th Grade Math Group 1 (17-EX + 7-TR) (24-EN-EM) 8th Grade ELA Group 2 8th Grade Math Group 1 (17-EX + 7-EM-TR) (17-EN + 7-EX) The Saturday program will provide ELLs with three hours of instruction in NLA, mathematics, and ENL. Although all ELLs will be encouraged to attend, we will place a special focus on students in the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning levels. The program will employ three teachers, one for each subject. Students will attend Saturday classes through May 2019. Each class will take an hour for a total of three hours per day. After school on Tuesday and Thursday, we have after school literacy and mathematics enrichment for ELLs. Students will use the reading program LightSail with supporting ENL instruction to raise their level of English. In mathematics, instruction will focus on providing students with varying experiences of education (including SIFE students) with the foundational skills necessary to handle CCLS grade level standards. Teaching will occur in the students' native language and provide culturally relevant materials as well as manipulatives and access to Promethean Boards. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL will focus on developing literacy skills in English through guided reading of high-interest low level texts. Students will have access to leveled classroom libraries as well as our MyOn online library and the leveled and translated non-fiction texts in Newsela. NLA will support our TCRWP ELA curriculum, helping students to master grade-level CCLS concepts and transfer their new understandings to ELA. After School Enrichment After school on Tuesday and Thursday, two qualified teachers will provide supplemental English Language Arts and Mathematics programs in alternating 60-minute blocks for a total of 120 minutes per afternoon. The program will begin on October 9th, 2018 and will run through June 20th, 2019 for a total of 40 Sessions. The focus of the mathematics program is on the foundations necessary for students to achieve in the world of the Common Core Learning Standards. Skills taught include two step and three step word problems, two digit and three digit multiplication and division. The literacy program capitalizes on the power of the LightSail application to assess student reading level and interests to match them with appropriate texts available online. One main focus of this literacy program is reading stamina. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will be at no cost. Assistant Principal, Freddy Budde, the Supervisor for ELLs in collaboration with Veronika Kiss, ELL Coordinator for the school will attend several professional development provided by NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (RBE-RN) provided by Fordham University Graduate School of Education. All professional development will be turned keyed to the staff. The staff is scheduled to meet as follows: October 23, 2018 - Analyzing student work in ELA class, looking at trends October 30 2018 - Language Objectives and how to write them November 5, 2018 Analyzing student work in a Math class December 10, 2018 - Looking at Student Writing across the ELL Levels and Bands January 14, 2019 - Listening/Speaking and Writing in Responding to Text February 4, 2019 - Preparing students to take the ELA Test for the first time. March 4, 2019 - Preparing ELLS for the State Math Exam. March 18, 2019 - How to prepare students for the NYSESLAT Speaking March 25, 2019-How to prepare students for the NYSESLAT Listening/Reading/Writing May 13, 2019 - Scoring the NYSESLAT Exam May 22, 2019 - Reviewing student progress & Developing summer school plan June 5, 2019 - TBA The meetings will encompass several topics throughout the year. One of the most important topics will be analyzing student work to determine what are the common trends found across the 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development content areas. Another topic of great importance is developing language objectives in each core content area. The suggested PD Topics are tentative and subject to change based on offsite PD'S attended by Mr. Budde and Ms. Kiss. In addition, the ELL coordinator will provide support to ELL teachers who are new to our school on an ongoing basis as part of our weekly meetings. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parents of our community are frequently unfamiliar with the New York City Department of Education and with life in New York City itself. Strengthening the home / school connection is our first priority. Parents drive our selection of parent engagement activities. Our first tool is the parent workshop. Topics are selected by parents and our parent coordinator with our CBO the Children's Aid Society (CAS) frequently providing expertise and support. CAS conducts a needs analysis at the beginning of each school year. The data from this analysis is provided to us in order that, together, we can respond to the needs of our families. Topics often covered include the NYSESLAT, supporting language acquisition and literacy at home, Jupiter Ed (our online gradebook and communication system), the state exams, and more. The meetings are about an hour and a-half long and often include classroom tours. The school uses various methods to reach parents such as School Messenger, personal phone calls, Jupiter Grades alerts and backpacking flyers with the students. Furthermore, in collaboration with the Children's Aid Society), our Parent Coordinator will also plan workshops which will address the needs of our ELL Population. We have events scheduled for the following dates: November 3rd, 2018,November 10th, 2018, November 14th, 2018, November 21st, 2018. These events include helping parents of ELLs with the high school application process, using Jupitergrades, identity protection in today's technology driven world, etc. Other tentative dates for events: January, 2019 (TBD), February, 2019 (TBD), March, 2019 (Getting ready for the state Mathematics and ELA exams), April, 2019 (Getting ready for the NYSESLAT). Records of attendance, agendas, and invitations in parents' preferred languages are retained by the Parent Coordinator Yvette Cabrera. Logs of electronic contact through SchoolMesseger and Jupiter Ed are stored online indefinitely. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 6 School Name Middle School 322 Borough Manhattan School Number 322 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Erica Zigelman Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Veronika Kiss Teacher/Subject Area Dennis Ryan/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Patrick Healy/S.S. Related-Service Provider Nerfori Blanchard-Soquet Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Freddy Budde, Kathryn Poole Coach Veronika Kiss School Counselor Bernice Duboff Parent Maria Morales Parent Coordinator Yvette Almonte Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) None C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 3 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 281 Total number of ELLs 129 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.91% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): SP If yes, indicate language(s): SP Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 21 21 7 18 14 32 8 28 12 40 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 46 0 0 47 0 0 93 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At Salome Urena Leadership Academy all ELLs are administered running records and then entered into the Teacher's College Assessment Pro as part of the Measure of Student Learning for ELA. Upon analyzing the running records the teachers divide the students into two group level, beginners, and advanced. To support and help the students meet their instructional goals the school has programmed 10 ELA periods into their schedule. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 58  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Programs include in school tests such as pre and post assessments after each ELA unit, AYP scores coming close to the real number and showing growth. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our ELL teacher team works closely with administration to decide which literacy section a child will join (beginner or advanced). Students who demonstrate the capacity to handle more difficult material are identified by the team and given the opportunity to move into classes where their skills can be tested. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Years of service appears to be a much more important indicator of NYSESLAT level than age or grade. Recognition of this fundamental issue led us to develop our language instruction program around the language acquisition level of our students rather than organizing student by their ages or grade levels. We have the flexibility to accurately match students with the support they require. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We do not have a Freestanding ENL program currently. b. TBE program. If applicable. Literacy instruction in our transitional bilingual program is taught by two staff members in a daily, two period literacy block, serving our ninety highest-needs ELL students. The students are grouped by the teachers of the ELL teaching team who use language acquisition, Fountas and Pinnell reading level and other measures to create groups of students with similar needs. The group with the highest language acquisition level (the advanced group) is taught by a single teacher using an adapted Teachers College Reading & Writing Project Reader’s Workshop curriculum similar to that used by the remainder of the ELA department. The beginner group is also taught by a single teacher. Their curriculum is further adapted to support the beginning stages of English Language acquisition. We provide students with access to leveled, high interest texts through MyOn.com which assesses students using the Lexile system and provides text recommendations based on interest, reading level and language preference (English or bilingual). MyOn also lets students have the texts read aloud and provides support with challenging vocabulary. In addition, students in the transitional bilingual program receive instruction in social studies, science and mathematics by teachers who are fluent Spanish speakers. c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 59  The goal of our dual language bilingual is to help students acquire formal, academic English and Spanish. The classes operate on a one-way model with instruction occurring primarily in English during their ELA classes, but alternating each week between Spanish and English in the remaining content area courses. Teachers have bilingual certification, allowing students to meet state requirements. Students also have access to MyOn.com with all of the assessments, texts, recommendations and supports included with the program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our TBE sections, mandated minimums are met or exceeded within the two period literacy block with the beginning group receiving closer support (ENL instruction) and the advanced group receiving instruction according to the TCRWP model (with ENL support). Beginner students receive TCRWP-based Reader’s and Writer’s Workshop instruction daily, taught by a teacher who holds biligual certification. TBE students receive ten periods of ELA In our TBE program, instruction in content area classes is governed first by CR Part 154 and the recommended HLA Usage/Support in TBE based on the level of the students. Literacy instruction in our ENL program is taught during a daily, double-period literacy block. Students receive instruction using the TCRWP Readers and Writers Workshop curriculum, adapted for ELLs with a certified ENL licensed teacher. All literacy teachers receive ongoing professional development and coaching from our TCRWP consultant, literacy coach and ELL coordinator in appropriately adapting the TCRWP workshops to effectively meet the instructional needs of ELLs at all levels. Students in our dual-language program receive ELA instruction using the TCRWP Readers and Writers Workshop curriculum, adapted for ELLs from teachers certified in bilingual education. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our TBE programs students receive the same grade-appropriate content as their peers in all core subject areas. While a wide variety of instructional scaffolds are used to ensure content mastery in the content area classroom for all of our ELL students day-to-day, several key instructional scaffolds, identified as having high investment return, are routinely expected supports across the content areas in all ELL content area classrooms: conceptual (versus procedural teaching), bilingual word walls, cognate walls, explicit instruction in bilingual dictionary/glossary use, visual supports, a daily language objective in addition to the content objective, hands-on/project-based learning whenever possible, adapted text, bilingual classroom library materials consisting of trade books at varied reading levels, multi-media supports including Discovery, NBCLearn and Brain Pop instructional videos, etc.. In our bilingual classes, in addition to the above-named scaffolds, Spanish is used in all content area classes to facilitate content comprehension and mastery for all students, while the relevant English CALP for the content area is simultaneously taught. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? This is done through the content area of social studies and science where students are required to produce large quantity of written work in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 60  a. Effectively addressing the needs of SIFE students begins with a careful look at the data. Teachers are trained to consider the SIFE flag in light of a student’s current years of service. For newcomer students, SIFE status identification begins with the registration process, during the informal oral interview. If SIFE status is determined at this point or is suspected at some point hereafter, students are evaluated using the ALLD. If a student is determined to be SIFE based on the ALLD, instructional staff for the target student is notified and the ELL Coordinator ensures that the instructional team has the opportunity to develop a collaborative plan to address the instructional needs of these students. Additionally, SIFE students are targeted for HLA AIS to ensure that they are equipped to access the appropriate grade-level curriculum in the content areas in the L1. They are also given first priority when we sign-students up for literacy intervention after school. SIFE students are also targeted for AIS in math, to ensure that students quickly develop the prerequisite skills needed for success in the grade-level classroom. The ELL Coordinator also collaborates with physical education, art, guidance and disciplinary staff to make them aware of the potentially unique needs of these students and to work with non-core-content staff in finding opportunities to effectively leverage opportunities within their respective areas to accelerate learning for this population. b.-c. We currently serve 117 ELL students in their first to third year of service. These students must leverage first language proficiencies across the content areas to accelerate English language acquisition and content mastery in the target language. To this end, the vast majority of these students receive a daily triple period literacy block, using the TCRWP Reader’s and Writer’s workshops to ensure content delivery in grade-appropriate. Access to content is supported through daily guided reading instruction and the use of computer-based interventions (MyOn) designed to accelerate literacy development for over-age students still working to master the foundations of English. Individualized support is also a cornerstone of our work with our newcomers ELLs, leveraging RTI and the conferring aspect of the TCRWP curriculum to provide students individualized feedback based on their unique needs. In science, mathematics, and social studies newcomer ELLs (typically at Beginner NYSELAT levels) are supported in language learning daily language objectives, in addition to the content objective. Teachers are trained to support students with explicit instruction in the CALP they will need to speak, read and write in English in academic contexts. These daily language objectives provide students with the ability to leverage resources within the classroom environment (process charts, word walls, cognate walls, sentence-starters, diverse, leveled classroom library materials) to begin independently synthesizing material to achieve increased levels of independence in self-expression over the course of the year. Core content subjects are taught by appropriately licensed teachers. Newcomers ELLs are never seen as an empty vessel to be filled. Students are always expected to and are given the opportunity to demonstrate content mastery regardless of language of instruction or production. The key to allowing our newcomer ELLs equitable access to the curriculum involves the use of strategies to allow varied entry and exit points to the same content, including: peer-work (turn’n’talk, group work), TPR, visual supports, extensive use of leveled trade books on the same topic, hands-on learning, graphic organizers, extensive modeling, differentiated product (where appropriate) and multi-media supports. In order to maximize opportunities for newcomer students to synthesize learning, both of content and language, a conceptual teaching approach in which student engage in project-based learning is encouraged, so that students have the opportunity to independently process in whichever language they are most comfortable while providing opportunities for students meaningfully express that understanding by leveraging the various tools they have been given. By creating a multi-lingually supportive learning environment and focusing on conceptual teaching, supported by explicit instruction in how to effectively use the wide range of strategies and supports available to them, our goal is to equip our newcomers ELLs with the meta-cognitive strategies they will need to take increased responsibility and ownership for their English language acquisition. d. The Renaissance Leadership Academy serves an equally large number of continuing ELLs, in the fourth to sixth year of service. For these students, a careful review of the data is key to our ability to strategically target student needs as the move toward full proficiency. Over the past several years, we have observed (through the BESIS Extension process) that our continuing ELLs tend to struggle in two primary areas. At this point in their learning, these students tend to struggle most in two primary areas: writing and speaking. Though BICS have generally been mastered at this point, these students continue to struggle with CALP and especially with the ability to “speak, read, and write like mathematicians, scientists and historians” (as described in the Common Core Standards). Our continuing ELLs struggle not with the ability to comprehend in English (Reading and Listening), but with the ability to effectively leverage CALP in the expressive modalities in a context appropriate 2018-19 CEP 61  way. To that end, we targeted our LTELL and at-risk LTELL (sixth year of service) ELLs, to identify and try out strategies to effectively reduce our LTELL numbers. This work produced a toolbox of strategies that guide instruction for our continuing ELLs. These strategies are those which begin to reduce the number of scaffolds that students will not have access to in the mainstream classroom, while increasing students’ repertoire of strategies for independently filling in comprehension gaps and making meaning on content. These include: explicit instruction in using dictionaries/glossaries, explicit instruction in the use of context clues, a daily language objective in addition to a content objective in across all content areas, involving students in looking a NYSESLAT modality breakdown data to set data-driven SMART goals, discovery/project-based learning, explicit instruction in making effective use of teacher feedback and understanding rubrics, consistently providing students with meaningful real-life applications of learning, and building engagement through coaching students to consistently look for personal connections with learning, while continuing familiar supports such as word walls, cognate walls, and differentiated classroom libraries across all content areas to allow students to continue to independently synthesize various supports to produce increasingly sophisticated product with decreasing levels of teacher-directed scaffolding. e. All teachers are provided with detailed profiles of their students, including ELL status and test out date. Former ELLs are highlighted in these lists. Teachers implement scaffolds including word walls, leveled reading materieal, visual supports, process charts, sentence stems, glossaries and an enormous variety of other tools which provide an environment where newly proficient students can prosper. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Modeling/differentiated structures of the TC Units of Study, add additional scaffolds 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We provide a least restrictive environment, we provide flexible scheduling and programming to allow students with disabilities to participate in more inclusive learning environments 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELL students participate in small group work each morning as per the Middle School Qulality Initiative (MSQI) where efforts focus on literacy. All ELL students have been invited to participate in our 21st Century after school tutorial program in English Language Arts and mathematics on Tuesday and Thursday. On the remaining afternoons, students are urged to participate in our Children's Aid Society's after school program. The combination brings important added teaching time to every ELL. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Additional afterschool tutoring sessions have been added as well as Saturday sessions and winter break tutorial sessions giving students more opportunities to succeed. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This year we intend to discontinue no programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. This year the school is the recipient of the 21st Century Community Learning Center grant. Through this grant all ELL's are required to participate in an afterschool program for additional support in ELA/MATH. Students are also allowed to participate in Theater, Chorus and Film Clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 62  All of the English Language Learners use technology each day as part of their daily instruction. This year the software "MyOn" is used. This software provides all students with high interest text at their independent reading level. Students will also have access to Jupiter Ed, which includes an online platform that gives the students access to a variety of classroom and learning tools, such as teacher-created checklists and scaffolding materials, bulletin boards, surveys, online editing, web assignments, etc. In addition to these resources, students will have access to leveled libraries with books in various high interest subjects. Specifically in mathematics, students are using Spatial-Temporal (ST) Math®, a visual, game-based instructional software for K-12 designed to boost math comprehension and proficiency through visual learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through the content areas as well as by Spanish speaking teachers in the TBE sections. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As described previously, our multigrade flexible transitional bilingual sections bring required services and resources to students in a way that corresponds to their levels of language acquisition. Beyond the literacy block, teachers take their students into grade appropriate content with the supports and resources necessary to help them access the same material as their peers beyond the ELL classrooms. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of the English Language Learners use technology each day as part of their daily instruction. This year the software "MyOn" is used. This software provides all students with high interest text at their independent reading level. Students will also have access to Jupiter Ed, which includes an online platform that gives the students access to a variety of classroom and learning tools, such as teacher-created checklists and scaffolding materials, bulletin boards, surveys, online editing, web assignments, etc. In addition to these resources, students will have access to leveled libraries with books in various high interest subjects. Specifically in mathematics, students are using Spatial-Temporal (ST) Math®, a visual, game-based instructional software for K-12 designed to boost math comprehension and proficiency through visual learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ELLs are welcomed to attend our summer Title III program to give the students an opportunity to acclimate to the school community and begin the process of developing grade appropriate skills. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not currently offer elective languages. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our dual language program is a one-way program designed to bring students who are dominant in Spanish to full Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency in English and Spanish. Instruction is delivered in both Spanish and English. Content area classes operate in Spanish 50% of the time, switching each week in a self-contained model. Literacy instruction is taught simultaneously in English and Spanish with a particular emphasis on English Language Arts 2018-19 CEP 63  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers are sent to Professional Development through Teachers College, The Office of English Language Learners and Middle School Quality Initiative. Teachers are also asked to turnkey information from Professional Development to their colleagues. All workshops attended are Common Core Aligned. Additional differentiation of lessons are included to provide multiple layers of supprt for ELLS. See question 1. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students entering middle school are invited to attend a series of open houses for new students as well as their parents. These open houses occur at the beginning of the school year and/or prior to the school year. Additionally, workshops for parents occur throughout the year to assist in easing the transition from elementary school to middle school. Our staff are provided time to meet and collaborate to discuss the needs of our diverse population. Teachers are sent to Professional Development through Teachers College, The Office of English Language Learners and Middle School Quality Initiative. Teachers are also asked to turnkey information from Professional Development to their colleagues. Teachers are asked to turn in Professional Development forms after each PD. In addition, during our weekly departmental meetings, an agenda and attandance record are recorded. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We hold ongoing parent workshops in collaboration with Childrens Aid Society to facilitate the highest attendance rates. During initial registration individual parent meetings occur to discuss program model based on their initial interview. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents of ELL's students are involved and included in our school activities. All members of our parent community are invited to school events. All communication is in both English and Spanish. Our Spanish speaking parent coordinator keeps in touch with our parents. Part of our Parent-Outreach includes the software "School Messenger" which allows parents to receive messages in Spanish about important meetings and school events. In addition, parents are kept up to date on the academic progress of their students via "Jupiter Grades" which allows parents to receive the information in their Home Language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The structures in place this year, augmented by 21st Century funding to bring after school tutoring to our ELL population, are the result of nearly a decade's thinking about the ELL challenge. Everything from flexible groupings to school clubs and bilingual student news are designed to bring ELL students into the center of our school community and help them thrive. 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Erica Zigelman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 322 School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) ERICA ZIGELMAN Title Principal FREDDY BUDDE Assistant Principal YVETTE ALMONTE Parent Coordinator VERONIKA KISS ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 67 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Middle School 322 Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez DBN: 06M322 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yvette Cabrera Parent Coordinator NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A Parent Home Language Survey is completed by every parent with the assistance of the parent coordinator. After the data is collected, it is entered into ATS. Regular mail to parents about school activities is written in Spanish and English. In house translators translate all correspondence using clear and simple language for all outgoing correspondence. Parents also receive information about school activities in both languages via our online grading system, Jupitergrades. When parents first register, they are asked to fill out a contact information sheet, which includes a question about preferred language of communication. This information is then uploaded to Jupiter. At the beginning of each school year, students and parents receive the handbook and fill out personal information, which contains questions about their home language. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Albanian Arabic Slovak, Bengali Bengali 395 2 3 2 1 73.97 402 .37 .56 .19 .19 2 3 1 0 75.28 .37 .56 .19 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families All correspondence is provided in English and Spanish. Written communications that is ongoing is translated into English and Spanish such as the Parent Handbook, Bell Schedule, and Permission Slips. Specific written communications are translated by the bilingual translation team composed of the bilingual parent coordinator, social worker and math teacher. The initial translation is conducted by one member and then reviewed by the other two to ensure accuracy. Traducelo, an IBM website is used to instantaneously translate all emails sent to Spanish reading parents into Spanish and for emails from Spanish writing parents into English. For low-incident or student-specific translations we use our bilingual parent coordinator to translate both orally and in writing. For our Arabic speaking families, we utilize the services of our bilingual paraprofessional. We also have an Albanian speaking staff member. September 20th: Meet the Teacher Night November 10th: High School Application Orientation for Parents plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Members of our bilingual translation team work on making sure all written communications (flyers, powerpoints shown at events, letters) are translated in a timely manner. 2018-19 CEP 69  Messages to families will be sent on Jupitergrades in all languages. November 27-28th: Parent-Teacher Conferences March 26-27th: Parent-Teacher Conferences May 16th: Parent-Teacher Conferences Parents will also be informed of monthly events, such as the teacher-student basketball game, bake sale, using both printed material and messages on our online grading system, Jupitergrades. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Middle School 322 will have the following meetings with parents throughout the year: Parent-Teacher Conferences, Meet The Teacher Night, Honor Roll Breakfast, numerous workshops throughout the year as well as informal conferences. September 20th: Meet the Teacher Night November 10th: High School How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Members of our bilingual team, as well as our Arabic speaking paraprofessional, and Albanian 2018-19 CEP 70  Application Orientation for Parents November 27-28th: Parent-Teacher Conferences March 26-27th: Parent-Teacher Conferences speaker will be present at all of these events and they will provide the necessary interpretation services. Printed material, which will have previously been translated, will also be provided at these events. May 16th: Parent-Teacher Conferences 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of emergency, we are able to use School Messenger (in English, Spanish , Arabic, Albanian, Slovak, Bengali) to reach all of our families. If we need to reach a small number of parents, we will utilize the services of our bilingual team. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our staff members have been provided with the Chancellor's Regulations via email . Numerous staff members are bilingual, have access to Jupitergrades, Google translate. Our data manager is in charge of School Messenger. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The guides are placed in a visible location at the Security Desk and parents are encouraged to take a copy. Additionally, we have placed the guides in the SUMA Parent Room which is part of our Community Based Organization (CHildren's Aid Society) 2018-19 CEP 71  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator will conduct informal surveys throughout the year. Our Data Manager will compile the answers and provide us a detailed report from ParentSurveys. Translated parent surveys from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet page will also be used to gather relevant data. 2018-19 CEP 72 
