2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M324 School Name: M.S. 324 - PATRIA MIRABAL Principal: CARLOS GUZMAN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Patria Mirabal Middle School 324 06M324 School Number (DBN): 310600010324 6,7,8 21 Jumel Place New York, NY 10032 212-923-4057 Phone Number: 212-923-4626 Fax: Carlos Guzman cguzman5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 06 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Carlos Guzman MatthewRodman Jazmin Batista Matthew Rodman JazminBatista n/a Alba Marinieves District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway New York, NY 10033 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carlos Guzman Matthew Rodman Jasmin Batista Judy Ortega Jasmin Batista N/A N/A Alba Marinieves Sylvia Gonzalez Claudia Anaya Juan DeLaCruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Co- President Parent Treasurer/Secretary Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Thelma Dolmo MingyarBodden MarlenyVassquez Teacher Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the school is to prepare all students for college, work, and citizenship in the local and global communities. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Patria Mirabal Middle School 324 is a community school in the Washington Heights neighborhood serving students in grades 6, 7, and 8. Our school was founded on the belief that students must be prepared for college, work, and citizenship in a college oriented environment that addresses the specific developmental needs of middle school children. Our student population includes 85% Hispanic, 10% Black, 3% White, 1% Asian, 0.5% Multi-Racial and 0.5% American Indian or Alaskan Native. We have partnerships with several community-based organizations and our campus provides a range of academic, health, and recreational supports for middle school students and their families. We offer a challenging and engaging academic program with a focus on providing individualized interventions to students performing at all academic levels. Teachers work collaboratively to plan instruction and are supported by academic coaches as well as consultants from the New York City Writing Project and Mathematics in the City. We have an established school structure that maximizes time for instruction while also recognizing the need for teacher collaboration time during the school day. In order to achieve our mission, M.S. 324 partners with support organizations to develop teacher capacity, strengthen parent-school collaboration, and improve academic outcomes for students. Children’s Aid Society provides counseling, medical and dental services, mental health support, parent education classes, and a comprehensive after school program to all students. M.S. 324 strategically partners with the Community Based Organization to improve academic outcomes for ELL students through targeted small group instruction that incorporates ELL pedagogical strategies, while providing interventions and enrichment. Students receive community service experience and tutoring through Fresh Youth Initiatives. In the Recycle a Bike program, students learn how to repair and design bicycles. Columbia University provides math tutors and support for a debate team. The New York Road Runners supports the track team. SAPIS provides counseling for drug and violence prevention. Artists’ space provides classes that integrate art, culture and literacy for students enrolled in the bilingual program. SHSAT provides tutoring for students as they prepare for the Specialized High School Exam. A representative from Columbia Presbyterian provides parents with a Parent Leadership Institute. DREAM provides support for restorative justice practices with teachers, parents and students. Urban Arts provides yoga classes for students. Teacher development is supported by school based instructional coaches and assistant principals as well as by outside organizations such as Math in the City, National Council for Teachers of English (NCTE), The National Writing Project (NWP), Teachers Unite, The Billion Oyster Project/Pace University and New York City Writing Project (NYCWP). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Of our 340 students, 34.41% of students are English language learners. M.S. 324 offers ENL standalone classes, ENL integrated classes, and a Spanish Transitional Bilingual Education program in grades 6, 7, and 8. 29.71% of our students receive special education services. M.S. 324 provides all special education services in line with students’ IEPs which currently include speech and language, occupational therapy, physical therapy, adaptive physical education, counseling, vision services, hearing services, assistive technology supports, Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT), special education support services (SETSS), self-contained classes, and ACES programs for students with cognitive disabilities. We address the social development of students through structured supports such as advisory and a school wide behavior system (PACT). Advisory takes place every morning during which time students explore topics applicable to adolescent development. Restorative circles are used to address internal and external conflicts. The pupil personnel team (PPT) is a multidisciplinary team that meets every Friday morning to discuss and program academic and social emotional interventions targeted to address individual students' needs. Tiered interventions are outlined in a flow chart used to guide teachers when referring students for intervention. As a Community School Campus we have a medical and mental health clinic on campus that works closely with teachers and parents. City Connects from Boston University assesses whole classes and individual students to determine need for intervention. We collaborate with many mental health facilities in the neighborhood to provide services for students and families. After school we offer classes and clubs that integrate academic learning into a social setting, address career readiness and expand learning opportunities. Based on student interest and needs, students self-select or are selected by teachers to attend clubs offering debate, recycle a bicycle, peer tutoring, musical theater, band, track, basketball, volleyball, soccer, rainbow club (respect for all), restorative justice, chess, and community service. This provides a time for teachers and students to build community within a social setting that incorporates academics. After school and on Saturdays we offer tutorials to address academic needs and strengths. These include math, literacy and science classes for bilingual students, math and literacy intervention. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on assessment data and the school quality guide, M.S. 324 has made the most progress in the areas of Supportive Environment and Rigorous Instruction. School staff engaged in professional development from Teachers Unite, DREAM and staff members to learn restorative justice practices that have now been implemented within classrooms resulting in an increased supportive environment. The schedule allows for teachers to meet and discuss lesson plans and curriculum. This resulted in a greater increase of rigor to instruction by teachers. Additionally M.S. 324 continued to excel in the area of Collaborative Teachers. However, This year we will pay attention to the Quality of Professional Development specifically in providing teachers with the opportunity to work with teachers from other schools on professional development. Our key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is Strong Family- Community Ties and Effective School Leadership, specifically in regards to the Principal's participation in instructional planning with teams of teachers. We aim to strengthen our family and community ties and exposing our families to community resources through partnerships with businesses, community based organizations and other families. We aim to increase growth in Literacy and Math for our students with disabilities and our ELL students through effective leadership by supporting and engaging in robust discussions, generating new instructional ideas during instructional teacher team meetings which will lead to providing rigorous and coherent instruction aligned to the CCLS. Additionally teachers will be provided regular and targeted feedback along with professional development on ELL strategies, strategies for students with disabilities and interventions. Teachers will collaboratively plan curriculum including tasks that meet the needs of all students. Ongoing formative assessments will ensure that students are on track to meet benchmarks throughout the school year. This area of growth touches on several of the components of 2018-19 CEP 11  The Framework for Great Schools but most closely aligns with rigorous instruction. M.S. 324 will continue to deepen its instructional supports for ELLs and students with disabilities to ensure that all students meet or exceed grade level standards. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M324 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 399 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 40 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 34.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 84.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.75 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 44 94.2% 4.3% 27.1% 12.0% 0.5% 0.5% 6 24% 5.4 26.6% 48% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-18 School Quality Guide, indicate high scores for Rigorous Instruction. We received Well Developed ratings for all three Instructional Core Indicators and our Framework Element score in Rigorous Instruction exceeded district and citywide averages. We offer a challenging and engaging academic program with a focus on providing individualized interventions to students performing at all academic levels. Teachers work collaboratively to plan instruction and are supported by academic coaches, Assistant Principal's as well as consultants from the New York City Writing Project and Mathematics in the City. We have an established school structure that maximizes time for instruction while also recognizing the need for teacher collaboration time during the school day. In literacy, students engage with high quality, culturally relevant texts across a variety of genres to prepare them to be lifelong, critical readers, while also learning to write for real world purposes through tasks designed for authentic audiences. Students hone their speaking & listening skills through opportunities for discussion (such as Socratic circles) and presentation (such as TED Talks). What students learn in literacy carries over to the work they do in social studies, where they practice the specific skills of reading and writing like historians. As they do so, students investigate a range of sources from which they learn to draw sound conclusions, analyze cycles of change over time, and apply historical knowledge to current events, resulting in more informed and engaged citizens. In mathematics, students explore content deeply and make connections between concepts by working on engaging, real-world based tasks in every unit. They also develop flexible numeracy skills through carefully sequenced math discussions (Number Strings). Eighth grade students are given the opportunity to prepare for and take the Algebra Regents. In science, students learn to think like scientists. They make hypotheses, perform experiments, collect data and draw conclusions. Literacy is incorporated into the science classroom as students are taught to write scientific claims and support their claims with evidence. Students are given the opportunity to take the Living Environment Regents at the end of eighth grade. We have an extensive arts program with performances and showcases aligned with the Blueprint that integrates the content of math and social studies. Our arts program includes fine arts, instrumental music, vocal music, band, musical theater and New Victory Theater. 2018-19 CEP 14  Teacher development is supported by school-based instructional coaches and assistant principals as well as by outside organizations such as Math in the City, National Council for Teachers of English (NCTE), The National Writing Project (NWP), Teachers Unite, The Billion Oyster Project/Pace University and New York City Writing Project (NYCWP). The priority need that will be addressed is to increase ELA and Math proficiency for our ELL students and for our students with disabilities. We aim to increase growth in Literacy and Math for all of our students but will include a focus on our ELL students and students with disabilities through rigorous instruction with regular and targeted feedback using inquiry-based tasks aligned to the CCLS. Additionally teachers will be provided regular and targeted feedback along with professional development on ELL strategies and interventions along with strategies and interventions for students with disabilities. Teachers will collaboratively plan curriculum including tasks that meet the needs of all students. M.S. 324 will continue to deepen its instructional supports for ELLs to ensure that all ELL students meet or exceed grade level standards. This need is based on our Spring 2018 ELA and Math scores as well as ongoing assessments. On the 2018 ELA exam scores were as follows: Overall the our proficiency percentage for all students was 28% and the growth percentile was 8% from 2017. 33% scored a level 1 and 38%, level 2. General education students, proficiency percentage was 35%, with 24% scoring at a level 1 and 41% level 2. Our Students with disabilities proficiency percentage was 4%, 67% level 1 and 29% level 2. ELL students, proficiency percentage was 4%, 72% scored a level 1 and 24% scored a level 2. On the 2018 Math exam scores were as follows: Overall the our proficiency percentage for all students was 27% and the growth percentile was 9%. 38% scored a level 1 and 35%, level 2. General education students, proficiency percentage was 32%, with 29% scored a level 1 and 38% level 2. Our Students with disabilities proficiency percentage was 6%, 71% level 1 and 23% level 2. ELL students, proficiency percentage was 14%, 56% scored a level 1 and 30% scored a level 2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, no more than 50 out of 115 ELL students will score a level 1 on the NYS Math exam, showing a proportional decrease of 13% as measured by the NYSED data report. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Specific goals and benchmarks will be outlined, monitored and revised based on student performance and growth throughout the school year. ELL students September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers-data analysis, adjustment of units, and progress monitoring Literacy/Social Studies Coach, Assistant Principals-data analysis professional development - In September 2019 teachers will analyze student work, assessments, portfolios and the 2018 ELA, Math and NYSESLAT data to determine what strategies and skills were assessed and which students did not demonstrate mastery. Students with disabilities September 2018-initial data analysis, formative assessments every 9 weeks - Teachers will use this information to modify units to address students’ specific needs across content areas. Teachers will use frequent formative assessments such as: running records, conference notes, reading logs, quizzes, unit tests and classroom tasks to monitor growth of specific reading and writing strategies and math skills. Reading, writing, and math formative assessments will be used every nine weeks to determine students’ reading and writing levels and growth in use of specific skills and strategies. ELL students will receive 2 additional periods of instruction in ELA and Math, providing students with 10 periods per subject. By making this adjustment to the student and teacher program, ELL students will have the same amount of instruction as all students. ELL students and students who are ELLs and SWDs September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Coach 2018-19 CEP 16 Literacy/SS coach, APs supervising Math/Science/ELL Bilingual/Special Education and monolingual teachers Intervention teachers Assistant Principals, Literacy coach Bilingual, ESL, special education, and general education teachers will attend bi-weekly PD provided by APs and coaches. Teachers will align curriculum maps with Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) for Literacy, Mathematics, the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP), and the NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement and will incorporate specific ELL strategies and strategies for students with disabilities. Teachers of ELLs and SWDs September 2018-June 2019, bi-weekly PD ELL students The program will allow for teachers to meet weekly by grade and content to analysis data and discuss progress. Targeted ELL students and students with disabilities will participate in intervention groups weekly for six weeks. We will use the RTI model to select the groups, after six weeks a new group will be selected. Teachers will utilize strategies learned in professional development and will collaboratively create intervention plans based on ongoing data analysis of students’ needs. Strategies include work on fluency, phonological processing, grammar, syntax, word work and stamina in reading and writing. Programs such as English 3D and Sound Reading Solutions will be used to support student growth. For Math students will work on fluency, basic arithmetic and unit of study reinforcement. Intervention groups will take place during the school day and after school Monday through Friday and on Saturday. Teachers will provide parent workshops on the ELL interventions and how parents can support students at home. ELL Students, students with disabilities, Parents of ELLs and students with disabilities Weekly Grade specific and content specific meetings October 2018-June 2019, intervention groups weekly beginning in October, Parent workshop in October Every six weeks a different target group will receive writing/reading and math lab 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will learn about Literacy and Math tasks and intervention services during parent orientation in June 2018 for the incoming 6th grade students and curriculum night workshops in September 2018 led by content area teachers. Parents will be updated on student progress through online progress reports updated biweekly, four interim progress reports, and quarterly report cards which will be updated by teachers. The parent coordinator, Parent President, guidance counselor and coach will hold a minimum of two parent workshops for parent education about CCLS, intervention strategies and programs, and how to support students in the home with the focus on student achievement one in November 2018 and one in March 2019. The assistant principal and teachers will lead a workshop on services for ELLs and Student with Disabilities in January 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  Tax Levy Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP will continue to be used to fund two full time ESL teaching positions. Contract for Excellence, Title 1 SWP and Tax Levy Fair Student Funding will continue to be used to fund teachers to provide strategic intense small group intervention in literacy and reading and writing in the content areas. Title 1 SWP will continue to be used to provide coverage for teachers participating in professional development focused on ELL learning strategies and special education strategies. SIFE and Title 3 will continue to be used to fund after school and Saturday programs for ELL and SIFE students. The program will fund from October 2018 until May 2019. NYSTL textbook funds will be used to purchase common core aligned materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students will move up one instructional level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Level Assessments. By February 2019 students will show mastery of specific mathematical concepts measured by the data from the intervention formative and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels Assessment will be the instrument of measure that is used to assess reading progress. End of intervention cycle math assessment and NYS Math exam. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On the most recent School Quality Guide (2017-2018) M.S. 324 exceeded the district and citywide averages for rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, some elements in supportive environment, and some elements of effective school leadership. We address the social development of students through structured supports such as advisory and a school wide behavior system (PACT). Advisory takes place every morning. The PPT is a multidisciplinary team that meets every Friday morning to discuss and program academic and social emotional interventions. Tiered interventions are outlined in a flow chart used to guide teachers when referring students for intervention. As a Community School Campus we have a medical and mental health clinic on campus that works closely with teachers and parents. City Connects from Boston University assesses whole classes and individual students to determine need for intervention. We collaborate with many mental health facilities in the neighborhood to provide services for students and families. After school, we offer classes and clubs that integrate academic learning into a social setting and address career readiness. Based on student interest and needs, students self-selected or were selected by teachers to attend clubs offering Debate, Recycle a Bicycle, Peer Tutoring, Book Club, Musical Theater, Band, Guitar Club, Book Club, Boys Track, Girls Track, Volleyball, Baseball, Basketball, Rainbow Club (Respect for All), and Community Service. It provides a time for teachers and students to build community within a social setting that incorporates academics. After school and on Saturdays we offer tutorials to address academic needs and strengths. These include math, literacy and science classes for bilingual students, SHSAT test prep, math and literacy intervention. Suspension data shows that a significant number of total suspensions are earned by male students. A review of discipline referrals and suspension reports indicate that there is a need to increase student ownership and engagement in their own social emotional growth. Students are able to seek out resources (counselors, adults, mediators) in the school but need additional development to independently resolve interpersonal conflicts and make specific goals and action plans for personal growth. Student growth is needed in the following areas: independently resolving interpersonal conflicts, taking ownership over mistakes, creating plants to repair the harm inflicted on others or the community, creating goals and action plans for personal growth, and transferring conflict resolution skills to their interactions outside of school. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 5 point decrease in superintendent suspensions for male students by implementing Restorative Justice Practices, resulting in no more than 62 out of 170 male students will score a level 1 on the NYS ELA exam, showing a proportional decrease of 8% of male students who scored a level 1 as measured by the NYSED data report. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers and paraprofessionals will attend monthly professional development sessions on restorative justice practices led by a consultant from DREAM, teachers, and RJ committee members. Professional development will include Tier 1 practices with a focus on building a deeper understanding of the foundations of restorative justice as well as community building circles. PD will also include sessions on more intensive Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions such as group assist circles, mediation, and repairing harm circles. Teachers and paraprofessionals will learn de-escalation and life crisis skills in an effort to decrease discipline referrals for students. Parents will participate in a series of three workshops on restorative justice practices led by the parent coordinator, RJ consultant from DREAM, students, and teachers. Workshops will consist of learning the theoretical foundations of restorative justice, tier one community building circles, tier two and three supports, and using RJ practices in the home to support adolescent development. A group of teachers and administrators will form a restorative justice committee that will meet monthly to assess the school wide culture, monitor school wide progress in implementing restorative practices, and measure the impact of these practices on students' academic and social emotional growth. Students, teachers, staff The team will monitor progress towards RJ goals and revise supports using an ongoing assessment of data. The team will analyze data such as anecdotal reports, discipline referrals, PACT scores, attendance, suspensions, observation feedback from community building circle and tier 2/3 circles, pupil personnel team reports, and classroom observation reports. Paraprofessionals, teachers, administrators Monthly professional development beginning in September 2018 and ending June 2019 Restorative Justice Committee: Assistant Principals, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders (6, 7, 8), Literacy coach, Dean Parents Minimum of Two workshops beginning in October 2018 and ending in May 2019 Monthly beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019 Restorative Justice Committee: Assistant Principals, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders (6, 7, 8), Literacy coach, RJ consultant Restorative Justice Committee: Assistant Principals, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders (6, 7, 8), Literacy coach 2018-19 CEP 21  The team will use this data to inform whole school, small group, and individual professional development supports. The team will collaborate with DREAM to create professional development aligned to the most current school data. The team will create inter-visitation schedules so that teachers can learn from their colleagues. We will role out a "100% Respect" campaign in phases Phase I - The Defining RESPECT! Activity (DRA) – Getting Everyone on the Same Page In Advisory, during 4 sessions at the end of September, all students participate in defining what respectful behavior should look like: 1) student to student, 2) student to staff, and 3) staff to student. Staff will meet as well to define respectful behavior in these 3 arenas. A ‘RESPECT! Rep’ is chosen from each Advisory, creating a student leadership team. The Reps work with the RJ team to review all the charts created in Advisories and staff meetings and craft them into 3 comprehensive lists of RESPECT! Guidelines Phase II - Town Hall Meetings – Making Things Clear to All and Voting for Change. The Guidelines are presented by the RESPECT! Reps on each grade. Examples given, questions taken and clarifications made. They are ratified by each grade. Afterwards, they are posted in classrooms and hallways. Phase III - Developing Consistent Restorative Responses. In a series of workshops, the Dream consultant will be working with Deans and Counselors to work up a menu of restorative responses to violations of the Guidelines. Phase IV - Restorative Justice student leaders and the RJ team will analyze the effectiveness of school wide behavior support practices, provide feedback on school wide social emotional supports, and create revisions to school wide systems such as the school wide behavioral rubric (PACT). The group of students will gather feedback from their peers All students, staff, Administration and SLT. 4 session in advisory for DRA, by the end September 2018 Restorative Justice Committee: Assistant Principals, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders (6, 7, 8), Literacy coach, Dean Phase II Town Hall Meetings by grade 1st week of October 2018 Phase III 2018-19 CEP 22 and collaborate with teachers, parents, and school administration to implement school wide initiatives based on their findings. Developing Consistent Restorative Responses. By the 3rd week of October 2018 Phase IV Ongoing analysis End of October 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in a series of workshops between October 2018 and May 2019 on restorative justice practices led by the parent coordinator, RJ consultant from DREAM, students, and teachers. Workshops will consist of learning the theoretical foundations of restorative justice, tier one community building circles, tier two and three supports, and using restorative practices in the home to support adolescent development. The school will promote the 100% Respect Campaign on the school website and posted by the social media team. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are the members of the restorative justice committee which include assistant principals, teachers, a member from DREAM (NYCDOE) and the school guidance counselor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will leverage resources from the Restorative Justice Grant including the DREAM consultant and NYCDOE OSYD professional development sessions. Title 1 SWP will continue to be used to provide coverage for teachers participating in professional development focused on restorative justice practices. Title I SWP funds will be used to fund a student advisor position for the restorative justice student leadership group. The program will fund from September 2018 until June 2019. NYSTL textbook funds will be used to purchase common core aligned materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the number of suspensions as compared to February 2018 will decrease, specifically for males as measured by the suspensions report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The School Suspensions Report by race, gender and IEP will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of teacher work shows that curriculum plans are enriched by collaboration. The most recent Quality Review indicated that teacher pedagogy was rated well developed and is also the area of focus. The quality review also noted that teachers have a deep understanding of each student’s learning profile and the pedagogical practices that lead to student growth. However, student learning could be further enhanced if teachers shared and then implemented best practices across all classrooms. Reviews of student work and classroom observations demonstrate that learning is accelerated when students are engaged in rigorous, inquiry based learning tasks. Review of student work, state exams and interim assessments indicate that students do use higher level thinking skills such as analysis and synthesis to formulate arguments, opinions and to understand the reasoning of others. On the 2018 ELA exam scores were as follows: Overall the our proficiency percentage for all students was 28% and the growth percentile was 8% from 2017. 33% scored a level 1 and 38%, level 2. General education students, proficiency percentage was 35%, with 24% scoring at a level 1 and 41% level 2. Our Students with disabilities proficiency percentage was 4%, 67% level 1 and 29% level 2. ELL students, proficiency percentage was 4%, 72% scored a level 1 and 24% scored a level 2. On the 2018 Math exam scores were as follows: Overall the our proficiency percentage for all students was 27% and the growth percentile was 9%. 38% scored a level 1 and 35%, level 2. General education students, proficiency percentage was 32%, with 29% scored a level 1 and 38% level 2. Our Students with disabilities proficiency percentage was 6%, 71% level 1 and 23% level 2. ELL students, proficiency percentage was 14%, 56% scored a level 1 and 30% scored a level 2. Students are making growth in math, but are performing below grade level. Results of the teacher survey indicate that teachers need to continue to revise the curriculum to fully embed the practices outlined in the instructional shifts. These data points show that teachers have begun to implement the instructional shifts but now need to deepen their work in this area by collaboratively refining tasks and creating new tasks to address our students’ needs particularly our students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Teachers will work collaboratively to use assessments and informal tracking to inform their lesson planning and instructional practices. Through collaborative planning teachers will identify and develop best practices around writing and implementing math tasks. Teachers will collaboratively create and revise four literacy tasks and five math tasks within the curriculum that are rigorous and aligned with the CCLS. They will engage in revising curriculum maps, units of study and instructional plans that align with the CCLS. They will collaboratively develop project-based instructional plans that address real-life challenges through hands-on learning, and encourage higher-order thinking skills, problem solving, and application of concepts and skills. Teachers will develop instructional activities that support the 2018-19 CEP 25  integration of math and science and integration of literacy and social studies. Teachers will develop and implement instructional supports for students with disabilities and English language learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, content department teams will collaboratively analyze assessment data, analyze student work, revise curriculum and created benchmark exams to provide interventions for students in need of remediation. Resulting in, 80% of our "Targeted Group" students will demonstrate growth on the NYS ELA and/or math exam as a result of this collaboration. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish a comprehensive math professional development series incorporating the CCLS, Citywide Instructional Expectations supported by the Math supervisor and Math in the City. Teachers September, 2018 - May, 2019 Literacy Coach, Teachers, Assistant Principal Establish a comprehensive literacy professional development series incorporating the CCLS and study the shifts in standards in collaboration with the National Council of Teachers of English and the New York City Writing Project. PD conducted by the literacy coach and DOE in teaching the reading and writing skills required to write effective arguments in social studies, mathematics and science. Professional development beginning in September measured by teacher participation in workshops, teacher collaboration, inter-class visitations, direct classroom observation and student work. Develop and revise curriculum that incorporate tasks that meet the Citywide Instructional Expectations for Math and Literacy along with lesson plans that reflect backwards planning based on Common Core Learning Standards in Math and Literacy. Create modified work and scaffolded tasks for students with disabilities and English language learners. Common Core aligned tasks created by teachers and demonstrated by samples of student work and plans reflect understanding of curriculum for grades prior and forthcoming. Observations of lessons will note evidence of literacy and math tasks aligned to the CCLS following the Danielson Framework for Teaching . Observations will note evidence of supports for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Establish critical friends and peer reviews to share best practices as measured by observation of improvement in teacher practice and student work. Critical friends will also analyze formative assessment results such as performance on unit tests and DYO assessments. Teachers September 2018 -June 2019, weekly Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals Weekly PD sessions 2018-19 CEP 27 Curriculum revisions quarterly Teacher schedules include departmental, grade and team meetings to support PD, curriculum writing and unit planning. Teachers will share findings from implementation of unit tasks, inter-visitations and PD at department meetings. Curriculum units will be reviewed and revised each quarter based on student outcomes. Units will be revised on an ongoing basis to address the changing language needs of English language learners. Units will be revised on an ongoing basis to include modified and scaffolded work to address the needs of students with disabilities. Engage parents in Literacy and Math tasks during curriculum night workshops. Parents September 2018 -June 2019 Math Coach, Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals Engage parents in student progress monitoring through online progress reports updated biweekly, four interim progress reports, and quarterly report cards. The parent coordinator, guidance counselor and coach will hold parent workshops for parent education about CCLS, intervention strategies and programs, teaching in the home with the focus on student achievement. The school will continue to have an open door policy to encourage parent visitation and parent volunteerism in the classroom. Biweekly online progress reports, four interim progress reports, quarterly report cards; Monthly parent workshops 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will learn about Literacy and Math tasks during curriculum night workshops in September 2018 led by content area teachers. Parents will be updated on student progress through online progress reports updated biweekly, four interim progress reports, and quarterly report cards which will be updated by teachers. The parent coordinator, guidance counselor and coach will hold a minimum of two parent workshops for parent education about CCLS, intervention strategies and programs, and how to support students in the home with the focus on student achievement one in November 2018 and one in March 2019. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are the principal, assistant principals, and the parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Full time Literacy/Social Studies coach and APs will conduct PD. NCTE and NYC Writing Project consultants paid with Title 1 SWP funds to conduct PD. Per session rate for teachers to attend PD and to write curriculum. Teachers have 2018-19 CEP 28  common planning time during departmental and team common preps. Principal and AP will conduct observations. Coach and teachers will revise curriculum based on student data. Tax Levy Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP will continue to be used to fund a full time Literacy/Social Studies coach, consultants from NCTE and NYC Writing Project and to fund the Assistant Principals who have a solid understanding of how to teach literacy and math to the full array of students present in the school, to lead professional development that is both long term and ongoing and to facilitate interdisciplinary subject teams that meet weekly to discuss students and align instruction. TL Citywide Instructional Expectations and Title 3 will continue to fund per session professional development beginning in September 2018 until May 2019 for teachers to develop curriculum units with embedded tasks and that are aligned with Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students will meet 1/2 yearly targets for progress as measured by M.S. 324 periodic and interim assessments. Teachers will use a specific data tracker to monitor student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Periodic and interim assessments will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Base on the NYC School Quality Guide Multi-Year Summary report Effective School Leadership ratings were well exceeding citywide and district averages for 2016 and 2017. In 2018 there was a decrease of .62, particularly showing a substantial decrease due to teachers responses to Principal's participation in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Our ELLs population is 34% of our student body and our priority for the 2018 -2019 school year is to address and reduce the percentage of student performing at a level one with the impact of increasing the the percentage of students who are proficient. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will attend teacher team meeting (by content and by grade with a focus on working bi-weekly in collaboration with teacher teams on student data analysis, interventions, assessment and curriculum modifications to provide differentiation.  This will improve teacher responses to Principal participation in instructional planning with teams of teachers on the School Quality Guide, Effective Leadership component from a 47% to a 75% positive responses.  As a result, immediate ideas of support will be communicated between the teachers and the principal to best support student learning. This will result in no more than 40 out of 70 students with disabilities who will test, will performing at a level 1 on the NYS exam. Resulting in a 10% decrease. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Principal and teachers will engage in student data analysis to generate ideas on how to enhance student performance and identify target groups to provide interventions and track the process suing a data tracking system. Teachers will engage in monthly Professional Development with target on providing instruction for ELLs. All Math teachers will receive a program limited to teach 2 classes, 10 periods each with 5 periods of intervention/math labs. Embedded in the program, teachers will be scheduled to meet in teams. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 - May 2019 Principal Assistant Principals, Lead Math Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Principal, Assistant Principal, Bilingual, Special Education and ELL Math teachers. Principal, Assistant Principal, Bilingual, Special Education and ELL Math teachers. Student progress reports, formal and informal meetings between the parents and teachers will be used as way to communicate progress to parents and families. Students digital portfolio tasks and assessments will be used to analyze data and shared with parents via our Teacher Ease system. Administrators Teachers, Parents, Students, SWDs, ELLs October 2018 -June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals, Grade leaders We will follow the RTI model and provide 6 week of intervention for groups of students. Teams will analyze data and determine if students need further interventions, either by applying appropriate differentiation during their regular class time or after school. Team will then target a different group of students or continue to provide intervention for current group. Administrators, Teachers Every 6 weeks starting October 2018 to May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 31  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will invite families during the parent engagement time to meet with teachers and administration to communicate student progress. Parents will have the opportunity to voice ideas and concerns on a weekly bases. Parents will also attend town hall meetings to discuss data, this time will also be used to recruit parent leaders and offer training on how to support the school and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP funds will be used to hire an additional Bilingual teacher to provide more instruction for our ELLs students in Bilingual classes. Title III funds will be used to provide Professional Development to our bilingual and SpEd math teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will engage in a review of interim assessments to determine progress. The data will be analyzed via a class/student data tracker to determine the level of interventions provided to groups of students. By February 2019, Administrators will review the weekly agendas of the teacher team meeting to ensure full participation of all members. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly team agendas and School Quality Guide responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a review of the 2017-2018 parent survey and the School Quality Guide (2016-2017) MS 324 exceeded the district and citywide averages for strong family and community ties with a metric score of 4.25 which was an increase from the 2015-16 score of 3.96. A closer look indicates that the report showed that based on surveys MS 324 outperformed the city average in teacher outreach to parents with a score of 96. In the area of Parent Involvement in the Schools, MS 324 scored an 91 (up from 82 in 2015-16) which although it outperformed the city average is lower than the score for Outreach to Parents. The most recent School Quality Guide show a significant decrease from 4.45 to 3.38, a difference of 1.07 metric points bringing MS324 below the district average by .39 metric points. This indicates an area of need. Parents report that MS 324 has strong communication with parents but parents are not involved in daily activities in the school. Feedback from the Principal Performance Review suggested that the school should continue to develop systems and structures that to systematically communicate a unified set of high expectations for all students. Parent members of the School Leadership Team reported that parents voiced a concern of wanting to be more involved in the daily activities of the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will create 2 parent events providing opportunities for parent involvement and 1 parent-teacher event. Parent involvement in school will increase by 10% as measured by the School Quality Guide Strong Family-Community Ties Element Score. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The parent coordinator, family worker, Outreach Specialist, CBO and Principal will organize Family night event. The purpose is to provide parents with information and data about the school and addressing parents questions, concerns and ideas. Parents September 2018 to October 2018 During Family Night, parent leaders will be identified and recruited for training in facilitating events, leading/recruiting volunteers, PA/PTA Executive Board, high level of participation on SLT,CST, etc... Parents Teachers Students An initial meeting will occur with PA, SLT parents, parent coordinator, Family worker, CBO, and Outreach Specialist. The purpose will be to plan 2 events created by parents to increase parent involvement and parent empowerment and 1 parent - teacher - student event to build trust, support and community. Parent leaders will attend training by a DOE Outreach Specialist. The training will focus on empowering parent leaders/volunteers and providing them with the tools needed to facilitate transformative family engagement. Parents will be supported in building capacity to take volunteers and leadership roles in the school community and to move parents and caregivers from being mere observers of what is happening in the school to active, engaged partners. Parents Initial meeting October 2018 to November 2018 2 Parent Events and 1 parent teacher event November 2018 to June 2019 October 2018 to June 2019 Offered to parents during the week and on Saturdays Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, parent coordinator, Family worker, CBO Children's Aid Society and DOE Outreach Specialist Principal, parent coordinator, Family worker SLT parent members, CBO and Outreach Specialist DOE Outreach Specialist Parent Coordinator Family Worker Principal 2018-19 CEP 34 Parents will be invited to school-wide celebrations. Parents will be invited to a minimum of one academic celebration per marking period such as publishing parties, math task celebrations, potlucks, and school wide student performances. Parents October 2018 to June 2019 Principal, AP, Grade team leaders (6, 7, 8) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid Society supports family and community engagement, NYC DOE Family Outreach Specialist. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School funds will continue to support a full time parent coordinator and Family worker. Common planning time will be allotted once a week for the parent involvement committee. During weekly grade team meetings teachers will plan academic celebrations and will make plans for involving parents in academic celebrations, lessons, and trips. Per session will be used to fund teacher led parent workshops. Per Session will used for Supervisors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of parents surveyed will report a positive response to parent involvement opportunities at our school as measured by a parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Quality Guide Strong Family-Community Ties Element Score Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have not made adequate progress (less than 50 th percentile for growth), students who are performing below grade level based on ELA assessments, diagnostics and interim assessments are chosen for intervention groups. Students who have not made adequate progress (less than 50 th percentile for growth), students who are performing below grade level based on Math assessments, diagnostics and interim assessments are chosen for intervention groups. Students are chosen based on their ability to access grade level material using the ELA exam and the Science diagnostic. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Writing Lab (for all students) Guided reading and vocabulary instruction for students from all sub groups Guided reading, intensive writing tutorials, and vocabulary instruction for ELLs. Lunch and Learn Basic skills development in math concepts and procedures Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1:8 ratio small group 1:8 ratio small group During the school day 1:15 ratio small group 1:5 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school and Saturday During the school lunch time 1:8 ratio small group 1:8 ratio small group Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school Math Lab 1:15 ratio small group Intensive instruction in specific skill gaps for ELLS 1:3 ratio Lunch and Learn Science Instruction and labs Lunch and Learn in small groups 1:8 ratio small group 1:3 ratio 1:8 ratio During the school day Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school and Saturday During the school lunch time Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school and on Saturday During the school day 2018-19 CEP 36  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Writing in the content area Content area literacy strategies Lunch and Learn 1:8 ratio small group 1:3 ratio School Counseling, Crisis Intervention 1:1 and small group counseling Small groups Monday, Tuesday, Thursday after school Monday, Tuesday after school day During the school day During school day During the school day Counseling with Children's Aid Society Class groups and small groups During and after the school day Class groups and small groups During and after the school day Counseling with CBOs Students are chosen based on their ability to access grade level material using the ELA exam and the Social Studies diagnostic Students are chosen based on an ongoing assessment of students’ social emotional needs. Teacher and staff refer students to the PPT (pupil personnel team) which then assigns services to students based on need. Anti-Bullying 7 th and 8 th graders HS Application preparation and visitations. Health counseling 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 46 Students in Temporary Housing currently attending MS 324. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH students will be provided with metrocards for transportation both to school and school-related programs such as Saturday programs. STH students will be provided with a school uniform as well as school meals including breakfast and lunch. They can also access meals during the summer through the Summer Meals program we provide. Counseling services, school supplies, emergency supplies (i.e. eyeglasses), and medical attention will also be provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our rigorous hiring procedures lead to attracting highly qualified teachers. Our hiring committee consists of administrators, teachers and parents. Beginning in February, teachers are asked to predict if they will return the following year. Based on the response, a search begins using the alumni websites of Teaching Fellows and Teach for America. Teachers contact their colleagues in other schools within and outside of the New York City. When Open Market becomes available, vacancies are posted. Candidates are invited to visit the school informally to determine if they would fit in with the school culture. Next, candidates sit for two interviews; one conducted by administration, coaches and parents and then one conducted by teachers. If it is determined that the candidate is a person of interest, the candidate does a demonstration lesson which is observed by administrators, teachers and parents. Where appropriate, students are asked for feedback about the candidate’s teaching. After all candidates are interviewed the committee meets to make selections. Once selections are made, the candidates are invited back to attend a departmental meeting. The department provides feedback to the hiring committee. After this, the final selections are made. Teachers complete preference sheets annually and these are used in conjunction with end of the year administrator-teacher conferences to coordinate teachers' areas of expertise and interests when making assignments. To retain teachers MS 324 provides high quality professional development, seeks out ongoing feedback from teachers on all decisions made in the school, and supports teacher leadership in the school. Every teacher meets with an administrator to set goals at the beginning of the year and support is aligned to those goals. Teachers have an active voice in the long term vision and daily functioning of the school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is held weekly and built into every teacher’s schedule to bring instruction in line with the relevant Performance Standards and practices. The Professional Development group is led by the administration in collaboration with the Math/Science and Literacy/Social Studies coaches, PD committee, and with support from Math in the City, National Council of English Teachers and the New York City Writing Project. 2018-19 CEP 40  We provide ongoing professional development on ENL strategies to support ELL learning for literacy and math bilingual and ESL teachers. Teachers attend NCTE seminars and webinars on ENL instructional strategies. Teachers attend professional development as part of their Professional Activity menu and during common preps, after school and provided by outside resources. In collaboration with the literacy coach and ELL coordinator, teachers participate in study groups using journal articles and books addressing the needs of the ELLs and students in special education classes. Planning meetings are held once a week to enable our teachers to identify and target the language needs of students based on assessment of student work. Teachers attend professional development sessions led on understanding and using research on how ELLs learn and to increase English language learning. In class coaching and after school PD sessions will be utilized. Professional texts such as The Journey Is Everything: Teaching Essays That Students Want to Write for People Who Want to Read Them by Katherine Bomer and excerpts from Minds Made for Stories by Thomas Newkirk) will guide work in the Literacy department on essay writing. Professional development will support teachers in providing high quality instruction in students’ identified areas of need. Teachers will receive PD on the following topics: strengthening vocabulary in the content areas, developing reading fluency, using guided reading to increase reading comprehension and automaticity, using Words Their Way to improve phonological and vocabulary skills, and improving student writing in different genres. Paraprofessionals attend weekly professional development from the assistant principals on topics that address the students’ needs as well as each paraprofessional’s area of growth. Topics such as designing questions, providing academic and behavioral support, behavior intervention plans, Common Core Learning Standards, instructional shifts, and supporting diverse learners with CCLS tasks will ensure that paraprofessionals deliver highly effective services to students. The DOE will provide professional development on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards, strategies for addressing the needs of English language learners and students with disabilities. Administrators will attend professional development on observing teachers using the Danielson rubric. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The SLT is the hub of communication and shared decision making. A member of each discipline sits on the SLT. Departmental meetings are used for teacher discussion and creation of various types of assessments. Grade subject team meetings are used to revise and modify assessments to fit the specific needs of the students in the class. Information is disseminated through email and posted on the school’s Google doc site. Professional development is based on review of observations, Teacher Instructional and Professional Goal forms submitted in September and student data from state exams, formative assessments and student work. Professional development is provided by Coaches, Principal, Assistant Principals and consultants from The NYC Writing Project, National Council of Teachers of English, and the DoE central office. Effectiveness of PD is based on teacher feedback and observations to determine effective implementation. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 271,580 0 18,126 0 3,136,324 X 0 X 0 X Section 5A Part 4a, Section 5c part 4a, Section 5D part 4a 0 Section 5A Part 4a, Section 5C part 4a 0 Section 5A Part 4a, Section 5C part 4a, Section 5D part 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 43   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Patria Mirabal School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Patria Mirabal Middle School 324 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Patria Mirabal Middle School 324, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 47  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The partnership at M.S. 324 currently includes: expanded learning time in afterschool to support academic achievement; engaging holiday and summer programming, enriched by strong community partnerships; access to CAS’ on-site, licensed school-based health clinic; innovative health and nutrition education; and robust parent/community engagement programming. Utilizing the CCNX model, an assessment will be conducted to evaluate the strengths and needs of every student in the key areas of a) academics, b) socio-emotional development, c) health, and d) family stability. Each student will then be connected to a tailored set of prevention, intervention and enrichment services. As needs are identified, CAS will offer services to increase supports across all four domains through increased academic support, social-emotional skills development, connection to medical, dental and/or mental health services, and parent education programming. The CCNX model is a proven high-impact intervention; CCNX students have shown significant improvements in key indicators of thriving – including report card scores for academic achievement, classroom behavior, and effort and work habits. The CAS community school model has also yielded significant results, including gains in reading and math assessments, increased attendance, improved school climate and greater parent involvement. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. A) By June 2019, our Community School will build skills that support academic achievement resulting in a 1 percentage point improvement in Level 3 or 4 as measured by NYS ELA and Math State Assessment Scores. B) By June 2019, our Community School will improve school attendance rates among a targeted cohort resulting in a 1 percentage point decrease in chronically absent youth from the previous year as measured by NYCDOE attendance reports. C) By June 2019, our Community School will build skills that support typical or strong SEL development resulting in a movement of students from the Need or Typical Categories of the DESSA-mini up to the Typical or Strength Categories as measured by the DESSA-mini Social-Emotional Learning Assessment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students will show significant improvements as indicated by report card grades, classroom behavior, effort and work habits, and increased attendance resulting in gains in reading and math assessments. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 CEP 52  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership Children's Aid Society Target Population All students Children's Aid Society All students After-school and summer enrichment (ELT) Licensed medical, dental and mental health services By June 2019, student academic achievement will increase by percentage point in Level 3 or 4 as measured by NYS ELA and Math State Assessment Scores. By June 2019, attendance rates will decrease 1 percentage point compared to the previous year as measured by NYCDOE attendance reports. By June 2019, 50% of parents will have attended at least one parent engagement event as measured by attendance sign-in. Children's Aid Society All students and families Robust parent engagement programming Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School and CBO funds will be used to hire staff for academic intervention, extended learning time supervision, directors, mental and physical health staff. Funds will be used for instructional materials and supplies as well as supplies for parent engagement workshops and events. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 2018-19 CEP 53  2. 3. 4. lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Children’s Aid Society, with more than 20 years’ experience implementing community school programs and the National Center for Community Schools that has assisted over 15,000 adaptation sites, will be responsible for the oversight, governance, implementation, and coordination at M.S. 324. A strong infrastructure is in place to ensure the seamless integration of this new component and coordination of the overall community school program through an established and solid partnership between CAS and the school, facilitated by the CAS Community School Director, Marinieves Alba, who provides overall leadership, direction and support to CAS services offered at the campus. Ms. Alba ensures that all supports and services are delivered with the highest quality, in accordance with the mission, vision and goals of CAS, and within the context of our partnership and collaboration with the school. She operationalizes the partnership by maintaining and nurturing the relationship, including through ongoing timely communication, with the school administration. To support the successful implementation of the City Connects (CCNX) model, we will hire a CCNX Coordinator, who will be a SIFI (Seminar in Field Instruction) certified and Master’s level social worker and will be primarily responsible for the delivery of the Whole Class Review (WCR) for each child, a process which includes: 1) working with classroom teachers to identify the strengths and needs of each student through an assessment; 2) identifying and locating appropriate school- and/or community-based services and enrichments; 3) establishing connection between service providers and individual students and families; 4) documenting and tracking the delivery of the service; and 5) following up to ensure appropriateness of fit. In addition to the WCR, through a partnership with the New York University School of Social Work, the CCNX Coordinator will also provide field instruction to a social work student that through his/her placement at MSC will provide mental health support to students. The CCNX Coordinator, who will be a full-time CAS employee, will be supervised by Community School Director, Ms. Alba. Professional development for all CAS program staff is supported by monthly director meetings, two full-day training seminars for after-school staff covering topics such as core competencies and child abuse identification, targeted trainings on aligning program activities with the Common Core, trainings provided by the Boys & Girls Clubs of America and Partnership for After School Education on topics including life skills and leadership development, and trainings provided by CAS’ National Center for Community Schools, including its Annual Community Schools Practicum, which convenes community school leaders throughout the country to examine emerging needs and best practices. CAS’ Vice President for School-Age Programs, Drema Brown, will provide overall leadership to the initiative. 2018-19 CEP 54  The principal, Carlos Guzman, is an active partner with CAS in coordinating program activities including those that are integrated into academic day classes, dedicating resources including teachers, space and extended building hours, and appointing Ms. Alba to their School Leadership Team’s and other avenues that support service and program integration. Ms. Alba and the principals interact daily, addressing issues as they arise and scheduling meetings as needed. Because the CCNX component to be implemented through this initiative will extend into the school day classrooms and teacher involvement will be necessary, the principal provides leadership and structure for orienting teachers to the City Connects model. Student safety is a priority for all, and is supported by the nurturing environment developed by the community school partnership as well as protocols that are consistently reinforced by school and CAS staff. For example, all DOE and CAS staff are carefully screened and are mandated reporters. Through intake processes at both the school and CAS programs, we are aware of special needs and medical issues presented by students, as well as special instructions that may be put in place with regard to specific students. CAS also participates actively in the School Safety Committee and helps to plan and implement safety procedures such as fire drills and student pick-ups. Utilizing the CCNX model, an assessment will be conducted to evaluate the strengths and needs of every student in the key areas of a) academics, b) socio-emotional development, c) health, and d) family stability. Each student will then be connected to a tailored set of prevention, intervention and enrichment services. As needs are identified, CAS will offer services to increase supports across all four domains through increased academic support, social-emotional skills development, connection to medical, dental and/or mental health services, and parent education programming. A focus on the education of children and the strength of the surrounding community are required to create the “web of support” that will effectively undergird children’s development. Our community school aims to provide various supports and services all year long, both during and outside the regular school day, to help students develop academically and socially. Many of these comprehensive supports and services are integrated and aligned with the school day and are provided to those most in need of academic and social boosts, while others ensure that the barriers to learning are addressed before school, after school or during holidays and weekends, protecting the emphasis on school day learning. At the heart of the community school model is a partnership with the school principal in which CAS and the school develop mutual goals and jointly leverage resources to implement the activities that will support those goals. CAS community school staff work alongside DOE colleagues throughout as well as after the regular school day and are fully integrated into the school’s planning, governance and decision-making bodies. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 2018-19 CEP 55  3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The CBO Children's Aid Society has the following partnerships which enhances the program:  Recycle-A-Bicycle to foster youth development, environmental education, community engagement, and healthy living;  New York Public Library Fort Washington Branch and NYU’s Child Study Center, which will support our academic support and literacy efforts;  New York Academy of Sciences to enhance our STEM based activities;  Caribbean Cultural Center, which teaches Capoeira, a form of Brazilian martial arts that combines dance, acrobatics and music;  Tribeca Film Institute, which offers an arts education program designed for middle school youth;  Los Pleneros de la 21, a community-based residency program that exposes students to Puerto Rican culture and traditions through music, dance and a creative arts workshop;  World Soccer Organization, which will support our delivery of high-quality sports and fitness activities;  Every Person Influences Children through parent workshops and education;  Boys and Girls Clubs of America through the offering of professional development and curricula; and  The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, which offers a wide range of resources for youth to learn about African heritage. The Community School Team meets weekly to discuss needs and assess progress towards the Community School Goals. The Team consists of the dean, assistant principal, family worker, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, SAPIS worker, CAS Mental Health Director and CAS counselors. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Human resources will include: Children's Aid Society Director, CITY Connects Coordinator, CAS Academic Specialist./ Liason, Afterschool Director, Social Workers, Nurse. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 11, 2018- August 25, 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: BEFORE SCHOOL: Math and ELA morning sessions will be conducted. Using assessment data such as the NYSELAT, the 2018 Math and Ela exams, students will be chosen to either attend math or literacy. Morning Math Session: *Rationale: In Math, newcomers do considerably better in their first language than they do in English, but as specialized knowledge and new concepts are introduced, their reliance on their native language to be able to perform lessens, but their limited English Language skills prevent them from being adequately tested in anything other than their native language. However, as they receive their formal education in the United States over the years, their academic knowledge, and most importantly, language, is developed more deeply in English. Students’ math levels are assessed using DYO interim assessments and teacher made unit diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments. During the morning Math sessions, instruction is provided to ELL students who have gaps in their mathematical knowledge and are learning English. The program will target students’ specific mathematical content area needs based on ongoing assessments and will provide services to two groups of 10 students for a total of 20 students. Each student will attend the program twice a week with one group attending on Monday/Wednesday and another group attending on Tuesday/Thursday from October to April for a total of 20 sessions for each group of 10 students. *Subgroups and grade levels served: -Ells receiving bilingual instruction during the regular school day -Grades 6 and 7 *Schedule and Duration: -Group A (Entering and Emerging Proficiency Levels): 7:30 am to 8:20 am on Mon/Wed -Group B: (Transitioning and Expanding Proficiency Levels) 7:30 am to 8:20 am on Tues/Thurs *Language of Instruction: -Group A: Spanish -Group B: Spanish 40%/English 60% *# and types of certified teachers: -1 Bilingual Certified Math Teacher *Types of Materials: -Do the Math Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information -Connected Math Curriculum -Math Manipulatives/Tools -Software Morning Literacy Session: *Rationale: According to DYO assessments, our ELL students struggle to analyze the meaning of questions and need to improve vocabulary skills and reading comprehension in order to better understand all written material in both the native and target language. Improving vocabulary skills will lead to proficiency in written and spoken English, as well. During the morning Literacy session 1 ENL teacher will provide instruction to 10 students who are long-term ELLs and need to work on reading comprehension strategies and writing informational texts. This group will use a combination of English 3D and guided reading from 7:30-8:30 am twice a week from October to April for a total of 20 sessions. Students will create writing pieces and use academic language to support their pieces. *Subgroups and grade levels served: -Long-term Ells grades 6 and 7 *Schedule and Duration: -7:30 am-8:20 am -October to April; 2x per week *Language of Instruction: -English *# and types of certified teachers: -1 Bilingual Certified ELA Teacher *Types of Materials: -English 3D -Non-Fiction Guided Reading Sets -Non-Fiction Texts AFTER SCHOOL: *Rationale: Based on running records, interim assessments and review of student work, vocabulary, fluency and decoding are areas that ELLs in grades 6-7 have the most difficulty in when reading in English. Based on collected data, writing is another area of difficulty for ELL students. Reading and writing are the students’ greatest areas of need in grades 6-7. The results of the NYSELAT, the 2018 state math exams and state ELA exams, assessments in Science and Social Studies, and teacher-made content area assessments indicate that new arrival ELLs lack content area vocabulary skills in English. DYO math assessments and teacher made Science assessments indicate that the majority of ELLs in grades 6-7 lack basic math and science skills need additional instruction to meet more advanced standards. Our ELL SIFE students lack basic math skills as well as native language and target language skills. Additional funding will be used from other sources. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Science: The certified bilingual Science teacher will provide 10-15 students supplemental support in Science to our SIFE students instruction to students who have gaps in their Science knowledge due to missing school (SIFE students) or due to differing curriculum in the home country. *Subgroups and grade levels served: -SIFE -Grades 7 and 8 *Schedule and duration: -3:00 - 4:00 -January to April - 3 days per week - 20 Sessions *Language of Instruction: -Spanish * # and types of certified teachers: -1 Bilingual Certified Science Teacher *types of materials: -Science Kits -Poster Board -Science Texts Math: The bilingual math teacher will provide 10-15 students with explicit instruction in skill gaps and he will work with students on conceptual understanding of grade level content. Additionally he will work with students on mathematical vocabulary in both English and Spanish. *Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: -SIFE -Entering and Emerging -Grades 6-7 *Schedule and Duration: -3:00 - 4:00 -October to April - 3 days per week - 40 SESSIONS, 2 TEACHERS. *Language of Instruction: 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information -Spanish with ENL Support *# and Types of Certified Teachers: -1 Bilingual Certified Math Teacher *Types of Materials: -Math for ELLs Curriculum -Math Manipulatives -Software Literacy: During the Literacy sessions the teacher will provide support to a group of ELLs with low reading levels and limited reading comprehension in both the target and home languages. The teacher will use guided reading groups, strategy instruction, and vocabulary instruction to support these 10-15 students. *Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: -SIFE; Entering and Emerging -Grades 6-7 *Schedule and Duration: -3:00 - 4:00 -October to April - 3 days per week *Language of Instruction: -English/Spanish *# and Types of Certified Teachers: -1 Bilingual Certified ELA Teacher *Types of Materials: -Guided Reading Sets -Fiction/Non Fiction Texts -Software ENL: The ENL teacher will provide support to a group of 10-15 students. This group of students who struggle with reading informational texts, acquiring new vocabulary, and writing informational texts will work on these skills by using a combination of English 3D and guided reading. *Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: -Entering and Emerging 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information -Grades 6-7 *Schedule and Duration: -3:00 - 4:00 -October to April - 3 days per week *Language of Instruction: -English *# and Types of Certified Teachers: -1 ENL Certified Teacher *Types of Materials: -Guided Reading Sets -Fiction/Non Fiction Texts -Software -Rosetta Stone -Rigor Curriculum After School Program Breakdown: 4 teachers x 30 sessions x 1 hour per session 1 supervisor x 30 sessions x 1/2 hour per session SATURDAY ACADEMY: *Rationale: Analysis of inquiry team results and teacher assessments indicated that LT ELL and SIFE students’ Literacy abilities hindered their progress in content area work in Science and Math. Math diagnostic indicates that many of our ELLs have gaps in their mathematical knowledge and require strategy groups and targeted intervention to accelerate learning. According to running record assessments, the majority of our current SIFE and LT ELL students are reading at a 2nd grade level or lower. Further analysis of classroom assessments proved that the SIFE and LT ELL students at all reading levels need more intensive work in the areas of vocabulary acquisition, phonemic awareness, and reading comprehension. The patterns across proficiency levels and grades show a clear deficiency in writing and reading. Students also perform weakest in the areas of gathering meaning from written material, vocabulary, grammar, and phonemic awareness. The deficiencies in reading and writing also hinder progress in Science, Social Studies, and Math and students must be provided with rigorous instruction that includes research-based ELL strategies such as differentiated instruction, scaffolded work, and vocabulary instruction. Additionally, data indicates that our newcomer and beginner ELLs require additional support them in the following areas:ENL, English language acquisition, to support all other content areas. Saturday Program will be used to address these needs. Teachers will provide differentiated instruction to meet the needs of individual students and subgroups. It will be offered from February to April from 9:00-12:00 for 8 sessions. The program will service approximately 30 to 2018-19 CEP 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 45 students in grades 6 and 7 or 7 and 8. There will be 3 groups, one for each grade, of 10-15 students. They will be serviced by 3 certified ENL/BL teachers. The subjects that will be offered are Math, Science and ENL. The students will rotate every 60 minutes to be able to receive service from all subject teachers. The bilingual math teacher will provide students with explicit instruction in skill gaps and he will work with students on conceptual understanding of grade level content. Additionally he will work with students on mathematical vocabulary in both English and Spanish. The bilingual Science teacher will provide additional instruction to students who have gaps in their Science knowledge due to missing school (SIFE students) or due to differing curriculum in the home country. The ENL teacher will provide support to this group who struggles with reading informational texts, acquiring new vocabulary, and writing informational texts. *Subgroups and Grade levels served: -All proficiency levels -Grades 6 and 7 *Schedule and duration -February- April -9:00- 12:00 pm *Language of Instruction: -English *# and types of certified teachers: -2 Bilingual Certified Teachers: Math and Science -1 Certified ENL Teacher *Types of Materials: -Software -English 3D -Rigor -Independent Reading Books -Fiction/Non-Fiction Texts -Rosetta Stone -Math Tools -Science Kits -Science Texts -Math Texts Saturday Academy Breakdown: 3 teachers x 8 sessions x 3 hours per session 1 supervisor x 8 sessions x 3 hours per session 2018-19 CEP 63 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: *Rationale: Professional development will support teachers in providing high quality CCLS aligned instruction in ELL students’ identified areas of need. PD will support teachers in building the academic language of ELLs. Teachers will receive PD on the following topics: strengthening vocabulary in the content areas, developing reading fluency, using guided reading to increase reading comprehension and automaticity, improving students' written and spoken vocabulary skills, and cross-disciplinary reading and writing strategies to increase students’ acquisition of the English language. Teachers will also receive professional development in Building Powerful Numeracy , writing Number Strings, writing in the content area, and interdisciplinary instruction. Professional development is provided in collaboration with the Math, Literacy, Science, and Social Studies Coaches with support from City College and the National Writing Project. Included in Professional Development are all teachers who teach ELLs, which includes ELA, ENL, Math, Science and Arts teachers in bilingual and monolingual classes. The literacy coach and Assistant Principal provide ongoing professional development on ENL strategies to support ELL learning for literacy and math bilingual and ENL teachers. Teachers will attend seminars provided by our district, the Department of Education, and the New York City Writing Project to develop a variety of strategies that will meet the needs of our varied English Language Learners. Teachers of bilingual classes attend professional development along with their monolingual counterpart during common preps and after school. This PD is provided by teachers, coaches, and outside experts from the New York City Writing Project and City College. Bilingual teachers are expected to provide the same standards based instruction as monolingual teachers. The bilingual science teacher will attend workshops focused on project based learning and will work collaborate with teachers across the country as a participant in the National Writing Project's focus on argument writing in science. ENL and Literacy teachers will receive in class support from the literacy coach and New York City Writing Project consultant as they participate in lab sites which will consist of modeling, demonstration, planning and discussion. Bilingual teachers will participate in study groups using journal articles and books addressing the needs of the ELLs. Planning meetings are held once a week to enable our teachers to identify and target the language needs of our students based on assessment of student work. Also included in Professional Development are all teachers who teach ELLs, which include ELA, Math, Science and Arts teachers. Bilingual and ENL Certified Teachers working in the Title III program apply and integrate strategies and resources from the professional development sessions below to all instruction provided through the supplemental Title III programs. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part C: Professional Development Bilingual and ENL Teacher Professional Development:Dates: September-October and Ongoing 2018-2019Facilitated by: Assistant PrincipalParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Data Analysis and Intervention PlanningOutcome: Teachers will use assessment data to analyze students’ needs and create intervention plans.Weeks: October-November 2018Facilitated by: Assistant Principal, TeachersParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Effectively Communicating Regular, Relevant and Actionable FeedbackOutcome: Teachers will share tools created in department PDs for giving and receiving feedback in the classroom. Teachers will create tools for sharing feedback in collaborative teaching relationships. This will result in students and teachers giving and receiving specific, low-inference feedback aligned to students’ instructional goals.Weeks: Ongoing September-June 2018-19Dates: Weekly planning-PD periods, 90 minutes of collaborative teaching per week, Urban Arts SeminarsFacilitated by: TeachersParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Urban Arts: Story Studio: Integrating Arts into Literacy and Social Studies to Increase Student Achievement for English Language LearnersOutcome: Teachers participating in the Story Studio grant will create and evaluate instructional materials that integrate arts into Literacy and Social Studies. These materials will implement specific ELL instructional strategies. Grant participants will share their findings with the ELL team during bi-monthly story studio reflection sessions. Weeks: November 2018-February 2019Facilitated by: Assistant PrincipalParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Language Progressions, Writing Across Disciplines, and Assessing Student ProgressOutcome: Teachers will analyze the language progressions for writing and create differentiated writing tasks for students. Teachers will then engage in an inquiry cycle during which they will assess students’ needs, set instructional goals, teach using research based strategies, and assess the impact, and then revise instructional plans. The result will be a tool kit of differentiated writing tasks and teaching tools that will be shared with the school community.Weeks: March 2018-May 2019Facilitated by: Assistant PrincipalParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Learning Objectives and Formative Assessment for ELLsOutcome: Teachers will research the elements of effective formative assessment and feedback. Teachers will create a protocol to evaluate formative assessments and feedback. Teachers will create measurable learning objectives and assessments for a series of lessons and will provide feedback to one another using the research based protocol. After implementing the lesson series teachers will evaluate student learning using the formative assessment. Teachers will then create action plans for student learning and teachers will revise their formative assessment practices based on the inquiry cycle findings. Weeks: June 2019Facilitated by: Assistant PrincipalParticipants: All members of the ELL DepartmentTopic: Assessment and ReflectionOutcome: Teachers will use assessment data to reflect on student performance and progress. Teachers will create professional learning goals for the 2016-17 school year. Weeks: 9/6/18-10/7/18 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Exploring school-wide instructional focus, part 1--Establish foundation for periodic writing & reading assessments and portfolio system (set up data trackers, analyze state exam data from previous year, develop portfolio tools and routines) Outcome: Develop a set of tools that can be used to assess and track student growth on an on-going basis and to facilitate regular, actionable feedback Title III Link: Assessments are used to place student in the appropriate Title III programs; Assessment data used to provide individualized instruction. Weeks: 10/10/18- 10/21/18 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach 2018-19 CEP 65  Part C: Professional Development Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Collective review of diagnostic data Outcome: Integrate results into unit plans and use to inform intervention plans for the year Title III Link: Assessments are used to place student in the appropriate Title III programs; Assessment data used to provide individualized instruction. Weeks: 10/19/18-3/21/19 Facilitated by: New York City Writing Project Teaching Consultant & Literacy Coach Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Allowing for and fostering student choice and voice within a rigorous, Common Core-aligned writing curriculum, year 3 (this is a continuation of work begun with Grace Raffaele of the NYCWP) Outcomes: Refined instructional strategies and revised writing tasks across all grade levels; PD will include workshops & classroom visits from a NYCWP Teaching Consultant & the literacy coach, as well as intervisitations & turn-key presentations among department members. Title III Link: Further revise & refine authentic, relevant, culturally responsive curriculum & writing tasks as outlined in the literacy department instructional focus Weeks: 10/24/18- 1/20/19 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Exploring school-wide instructional focus, part 2--Assessment and feedback (continued development & refinement of portfolio tools, goal setting & tracking, revising our reading & writing conference strategies for more effective feedback, including peer-to-peer feedback Outcome: Teachers will incorporate practices gleaned from reading, viewing, & discussing resources on assessment & feedback to continue refining the cycle of assessment and instruction in literacy classes. Title III Link: Teachers will incorporate practices gleaned from reading, viewing, & discussing resources on assessment & feedback to continue refining the cycle of assessment and instruction in literacy classes. Weeks: 1/23/19 - 1/31/19 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Collective review of predictive data Outcome: Integrate results into remaining unit plans and use data to inform intervention plans. Title III Link: Assessments are used to place student in the appropriate Title III programs; Assessment data used to provide individualized instruction. Weeks: 2/7/19 - 5/12/19 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach Participants: ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Exploring literacy department instructional focus—“If teachers design authentic, relevant writing tasks so that students have choice, voice, & time, student agency will increase throughout the writing process, and students will view writing as a lifelong tool.” Resources will include Engaging Ideas: The Professor’s Guide to Integrating Writing, Critical Thinking, and Active Learning in the Classroom, John Bean; Crafting Authentic Voice, Tom Romano; selections from Peter Elbow & others TBD 2018-19 CEP 66  Part C: Professional Development Outcome: Restructured writing tasks intended for real-world audiences in which students learn how to flexibly employ a variety of methods for demonstrating knowledge & mastery of writing skills Title III Link: Restructured writing tasks for ELLs intended for real-world audiences in which ELL students learn how to flexibly employ a variety of methods for demonstrating knowledge & mastery of writing skills Weeks: 5/15/19 - 6/28/19 Facilitated by: Literacy Coach and New York City Writing Project Teaching Consultant Participants: Bilingual/ENL Certified and Non-Certified Literacy Teachers Topic: Reviewing and revising 2015-16 curriculum, as well as assessment & feedback methods, within and across grade level teams (share recommended changes/revisions and discuss ways to improve outcomes across grades by further aligning our practices and sharing common strategies, models, and vocabulary, particularly as they align to our school-wide and department instructional foci) Outcome: Revise and improve the literacy curriculum in anticipation of 2018-19 school year planning Title III Link: Revise and improve the literacy for ELLs curriculum in anticipation of 2018-19 school year planning September – October 2019 Facilitated by: Math Coach Participants: Bilingual Certified and Non-Certified Math Teachers Topic: Using the Instructional Focus as a guide, establish a foundation for interim assessments and portfolio system (set-up data trackers, analyze state exam data from previous year, develop portfolio tools and routines); use research-based articles to determine the most effective strategies for giving students feedback Outcome: Develop a set of tools that can be used to assess and track student growth on an on-going basis. Title III Link: Develop systems and tools to allow ELL students multiple opportunities to improve performance. Develop systems and tools to ensure timely, action-oriented feedback on portfolio tasks so ELL students have opportunities to improve performance. *Our work on assessment and feedback will be on-going throughout the year. On a monthly basis we will study samples of student work and use them to monitor student growth and assess the effectiveness of our feedback-giving processes. November- December 2018 Facilitated by: Math Coach + Kara Imm (Consultant from Math in the City) Participants: Bilingual Certified and Non-Certified Math Teachers Topic: Establish topics and routines for numeracy work. Topics to be explored include further developing number string practices and Smart Test Prep routines. Title III Link: Develop numeracy routines that promote critical thinking skills and establish the fluency required to master the Common Core standards. *Our work with Kara Imm will be on-going throughout the year. This is the period of time when we will establish the topics and begin the routines to be studied throughout the year. January 2019 Facilitated by: Math Coach, Literacy Coach, and Math and ELA teachers Participants: Bilingual Certified and Non-Certified Math Teachers 2018-19 CEP 67  Part C: Professional Development Topic: Reading in Math Class Outcome: Using the text “Literacy Strategies for Improving Mathematics Instruction” we will develop and implement reading strategies to support students in the math classroom. Title III Link: Developing tools to support ELLs in reading in the math classroom. February 2019 Facilitated by: Math Coach Participants: Bilingual Certified and Non-Certified Math Teachers Topic: Data Analysis Outcome: Using data collected over 3 months + Item Analysis data to adjust curricular and intervention plans. Title III Link: Data will be used to plan for ELL instruction. May – June 2019 Facilitated by: Math Coach Participants: Bilingual Certified and Non-Certified Math Teachers Topic: Review and revise math curriculum for the following year Outcome: Make adjustments to the current math curriculum based on data. The goal will be to enhance alignment of concepts from grade to grade, and to improve student mastery of concepts overall. Title III Link: Make adjustments to the current math curriculum based on ELL data. The goal will be to enhance alignment of concepts from grade to grade, and to improve student mastery of concepts overall. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: *Rationale: Parents of ELLs are invited to all parent workshops and supported in helping their children achieve academically, however, the school will host 5 ELL-specific workshops and 2 trips to build community and improve students’ academic outcomes. ELL families attend an introduction to middle school workshop in September where learning about school policies, and meeting teachers begins to build the school-home community which greatly impacts student achievement. The literacy coach and literacy teachers provide a workshop on strategies for improving at-home reading. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities ELL families are invited to attend workshops provided by the high-school coordinator on the high school application process. ELL students and families are invited on high school and college trips to expose them to various high schools and colleges and prepare them for college requirements. These two trips will be tailored to the needs of our families of students who are ELLs, many of whom are not familiar with the high school and college system in the United States. MS324 will provide parent leadership workshops throughout the school year led by Columbia University. The goal of the workshop series will be to develop parent leadership skills and to develop a team of parents who will become resources to other parents in the community. Parents will learn about empathy/active listening with adolescents, strategies for parent/child interactions, strategies for partnering with teachers, and training on partnering with other parents. This training will ultimately enrich students' school experience as the home-school connection is a key factor in long term student success. The parent coordinator will also participate in the workshops. All workshops are presented in both English and Spanish. To reach parents who speak other languages spoken by our students, we use the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit to communicate with parents over the phone. *Schedule and Duration; Topic/s to be Covered; Name of Provider/s: Date/Time: September 15, 2018 5:30 pm -8pmFacilitators: 6th grade TeachersWorkshop: Introduction to Middle School: How to Achieve SuccessIn this workshop, parents and students are introduced to MS 324's culture of high expectations regarding attendance, academics, and dress for success. Teachers share the curriculum, applications for public library cards, and expectations about daily reading at home and school. Date/Time: September 29, 2018 5:30 pm - 7:30 pmFacilitators: Judy Ortega (Parent Coordinator) Allison Koster (Teacher)Workshop: Art and Audition High Schools: Supporting ELL student and Parents through this ProcessIn this workshp, parents and students are shown the application process for art and audition high schools. Workshop facilitators help parents and students identify what deadlines, paperwork, essays, and other requirements needed. The workshop also helps parents and students with any essays or interviews that are part of the application. Date/Time: October 6, 2018 5:30 pm - 7:30 pmFacilitators: Ms. Moskop (HS Coordinator) Ms. Ortega (Parent Coordinator)Workshop: Helping Parents Navigate the High School Application Process Part 1 In this workshop parents and students receive guidance on researching schools and how to find schools that best match their child's needs and they receive an overview of the application and the application process. Date/Time: October 7, 14, 21, 28 2018 2:50 pm -3:40pm and 5:45 pm - 6:30 pmFacilitators: Judy Ortega (Parent Coordinator) Rafael Leclerc (Teacher)Workshop: ELL Parents Learn to Use Online Tools to track Student Progress In this workshop parents and students receive guidance on how to use the online grading system, Teacherease, to stay abreast of children's progress and to communicate with teachers to help students succeed. Date/Time: October 14, 2018 5:30 pm - 7:30 pmFacilitators: Ms. Moskop (HS Coordinator) Ms. Ortega (Parent Coordinator)Workshop: Helping Parents Navigate the High School Application Process Part IIIn this workshop students and parents continue learning about the high school application process. They are shown how to get the most out of high school fairs and individual visits to high schools. They are shown how to write an essay and how to dress and answer questions during interviews. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Date/Time: October 28, 2018 5:00 pm - 7:00 pmFacilitators: Ms. Moskop (HS Coordinator) Ms. Ortega (Parent Coordinator)Workshop: High School Application Process Workshop for the Parents of Hunter (8th Grade Bilingual Class)In this workshop students and parents in the bilingual program are given more support regarding high school fairs, interviews, high school visitations, paper work included in the application, and essays. Students and parents are also shown how to organize the visits, essays, and relevant testing to make the process manageable and successful. Date/Time: October 15th , 2018Faciliators: Carlos Guzman(Principal) Judy Ortega (Parent Coordinator)Workshop: ELL Parent Meeting: Academic Success for ELLs In this workshop, parents and students are shown the resources available to ELLs. The workshop highlights the bilingual staff, guidance counselors, Saturday academy, and the school's bilingual and ENL programs throughout the school. Date/Time: TBD November 2018 and February 2019 Facilitators: Saen Walton and Yasmin Batista (Parent President) Workshop: Restorative Justice Circles: Sean Walton will lead two workshops with parents on restorative practices in school and at home that support adolescent development.In this workshop students and parents will learn restorative practices that may help them with facilitating conversations at home, and they will learn how to engage in the conversational patterns and norms in English in various situations. They will learn unspoken cues and conversation starters that will help them have discussions in classrooms, on high school visits, high school fairs, and college tours. These workshops will also add phrases and models of expression into their writing repertoire. Date/Time: November 4, 2018 9 am - 11 am and 5:30 pm - 7:30 pmFacilitators: Ms. Koster (Teacher) Ms. Ortega (Parent Coordinator)Workshop: Helping Parents Navigate the High School Application Process In this workshop students and parents will continue to learn how to navigate the NYC high school application process. They will be taken through expectations for essays, interviews, interview attire, high school visitations, and other ways to research high schools: online, high school book, alumni. Date/Time: November 12, 2018 5:45 pm- 7:00 pmFacilitators: PA ParentsWorkshop: Parent Meeting; Supporting Student AchievementIn this workshop parents and students are exposed to support systems that help them prevent and identify violence in an effort to reduce the number of days absent. Date/Time: 12 Dates TBD 5:30 pm - 7:00 pmFacilitator: Jose GonzalezWorkshop: Parent Leader Training In this workshop parents are shown leadership skills that include conversational skills and critical thinking by engaging in various activities such as scenarios and team building. During these activities, parents are exercising conversational skills, writing skills, and collaborative problem solving. This workshop will impact student academic success because parents will engage with children in a manner that pushes children to think critically and be problem solvers. Date/Time: TBD in January 2019Facilitators: Literacy and ESL Teachers; Gina Salerno (Literacy Coach)Workshop: Supporting At Home Reading; Strategies for ELLsIn this workshop, students and parents will learn how to set up an environment at home that supports literacy through books, discussing stories read or stories written, discussing plots of movies/shows, and ways to build an at home library. The workshop will also take parents through the public library's resources and help them apply for a public library card. Date/Time: TBD in March 2019 - May 2019Facilitators: Judy Ortega (Parent Coordinator); Mr. Henriquez (Guidance)Event: 2 College Tours (Visit to College Campuses)Helping Parents and Students get College Ready.In these college tours, students will be exposed to a college campus. In preparation for the tour, students and parents are taken through the process of writing 2018-19 CEP 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities a mock college entry essay to prepare them to start thinking about their own story and how the college can be a continuation of that story of future success. Total Cost: $600 Date/Time: TBD March 2019Workshop: Asthma and Tobacco Facilitators: Children's Aid Society and Columbia Presbyterian will lead a workshop on preventing asthma. In this workshop parents and students learn how to prevent asthma in order to increase attendance rates at school. Increased attendance rates will will increase the time students are engaged in academic tasks and academic conversations. Date/Time: TBD April 2019Facilitators: Children's Aid Society mental health will lead a workshop on child abuse prevention. Workshop: Child Abuse Prevention: April In this workshop parents and students will learn how to prevent child abuse in an effort to increase the attendance rate at school. More time in school equals more time engaged in academic tasks and academic conversations. Date/Time: TBD April 2018 and May 2019 2-3 meetingsFacilitators: Judy Ortega (Parent Coordinator) Allison Koster(Teacher)Workshop: High School Application Process for parents of 7th graders In this workshop parents and students will expose 7th graders to the high school application process. Students and parents will learn of the different categories of high schools, the various requirements (such as performance, essays, or interviews), and how to start researching high school through the web, high school visitations, and speaking to current students at the high school. Mental Health: TBD JuneFacilitators: Ms. Ortega, parent coordinator, and CAS social workers will lead a workshop on community and at home mental health supports for adolescents and families. In this workshop students and parents are shown all the resources that are available to support adolescents through individual needs and developmental transitional periods. The resources are available in English and Spanish. The resources also continue the work of helping families navigate and access needed basic supports in order to have the energy to invest in academic conversations about high school and college. *How Parents will be Notified of these Activities: -For all workshops and events, parents are notified through school messenger (phone), TeacherEase (email), and fliers sent home through backpacks and posted around the school. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 CEP 71  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Patria Mirabal Middle School 324 Borough Manhattan School Number 324 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Janet Heller Coach Gina Salerno ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Javier Amador Teacher/Subject Area Thelma Dolmo/Literacy Teacher/Subject Area Juan DeLaCruz/Math Related-Service Provider Mayra Garcia Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Sandra Capers Coach School Counselor Aristotles Henriquez Parent Jasmine Batista Parent Coordinator Judy Ortega Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Sandra Capers, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 398 2018-19 CEP 73 Total number of ELLs 136 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 34.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2004-05 K 1 3 4 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are assessed using a variety of diagnostic, formative, and summative data. In addition to the ELA exam and the NYSESLAT exam, students' literacy skills are assessed using running records. Additional data is collected from the DYO diagnostic reading and writing assessments aligned with the CCLS. Ongoing data is collected in order to ensure that students are making progress. This data is collected from tasks in all content areas, DYO reading and writing assessments, additional administrations of running records, reading conferences, and teacher made assessments. All data is used to differentiate unit and lesson plans, create targeted intervention groups, and identify areas of study for our professional learning communities. The patterns across proficiency levels and grades show a clear deficiency in writing and reading. Students also perform weakest in the areas of gathering meaning from written material, vocabulary, grammar, and phonemic awareness. These are patterns that are not particular to this school, but indicative of the academic realities that ELLs in general face. The strongest modalities in this population are listening and speaking. The deficiencies in reading and writing also hinder progress in Science, Social Studies, and Math and students must be provided with rigorous instruction that includes 2018-19 CEP 74  research-based ELL strategies such as differentiated instruction, scaffolded work, and vocabulary instruction. Students must also receive targeted intervention that will address the needs of specific subgroups such as long term ELLs, SIFE students, and students with disabilities. According to running record assessments, the majority of our current SIFE and LT ELL students are reading at a 2nd grade level lower. Further analysis of classroom assessments proved that the SIFE and LT ELL students at all reading levels need more intensive work in the areas of vocabulary acquisition, phonemic awareness, and reading comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The implications of the data above for the school’s instruction are to apply all our resources to identify and minimize the academic areas where students struggle and reinforce the areas where students show strengths so they might demonstrate gains in all academic areas and on all required standardized tests: the ELA, the State Math test and the NYSESLAT. We have different levels of structures and support in place in order to achieve this. Students’ specific needs will be continuously monitored through formative, unit, and interim assessments. Data from these assessments will be analyzed by teachers during department meetings and used to modify classroom instruction and intervention services to target students' needs. The ELL, math, and literacy departments begin this process each fall by giving a diagnostic to all of their students in the fall. The data from this diagnostic is used as a benchmark to assess growth. It is also used as the first tool to plan targeted instruction for students. Instruction around vocabulary acquisition, phonemic awareness, and reading comprehension will be provided through Sound Reading Solutions and guided reading groups in literacy and ENL classes. Science and Social Studies teachers will engage in professional study groups focused on reading non fiction texts, writing evidence based essays, and teaching vocabulary, and will implement the studied practices in their classrooms. Literacy teachers will engage in study groups about close reading of rigorous texts and will implement these strategies to improve reading comprehension and vocabulary acquisition. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Data is collected on an ongoing basis and used to analyze the success of programs for ELLs. At the beginning of the year teacher teams analyze the state exam results and the diagnostic assessment data. Diagnostic assessments are given in all subject areas and include one for diagnosing the language abilities of ELLs. This information is used to set instructional goals. Formative assessments (running records, writing tasks, math tasks, teacher made unit assessments, exit slips, weekly quizzes) are used to measure progress towards the long term goals. Our goals are for students to meet AMAO targets on the NYSESLAT exam, to make at least 1.5 years growth in reading, and to score above the 50th percentile on the ELA and math exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During the school day math and literacy teachers have learning lab periods in which they implement targeted strategies to small groups of students. ELLs are provided with intervention programs before and after school and on Saturdays that also target the needs of specific groups. As noted above, teachers regularly engage in cycles of gathering and analyzing data. This data is used to plan targeted classroom instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ELL students receive strong core instruction (Tier I). When a student does not show sufficient progress, Tier II strategies are implemented by the teacher usually within the classroom in the form of differentiation or in weekly labs. Student progress is monitored and adjusted as needed by the student. If with Tier II intervention the student is still not making adequate progress, intensive targeted intervention is provided in small group settings during school, afterschool, and on Saturdays. Progress is continuously monitored and instruction is adjusted according to student progress. Students are identified for intervention because ELL data is collected on an ongoing basis. ELL data is analyzed and students are provided with different tiers of 2018-19 CEP 75  intervention services as needed. The school has a school wide interdisciplinary team that includes a teacher, administrator, guidance counselor, attendance worker, and counselors who analyze student needs based on teacher referrals and assessment data. The school also has grade level interdisciplinary teams that meet every week to plan instruction based on data gathered from the week's classwork and assessments. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Assessments used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs include the ELA, Math Exam, and NYSESLAT. On the 2017 Math exam scores were as follows: Overall the mean score was 2.37 and the median growth percentile was 55; 33% of English Language Learners scored a level 2 and 11% scored a level 3 or 4. On the 2017 English language arts exam scores were as follows: Overall the mean score was 2.41 and the median growth percentile was 44; 20% of the English Language Learners scored a level 2 and 8% scored a level 3 or 4. On the most recent school quality guide M.S. 324 exceeded the target for closing the achievement gap for ELLs in both Literacy and Math. M.S. 324 exceeded the target for ELL progress with a school value of 51.4%. Data analysis indicates that most students in PL1 are English Language Learners. Further analyses shows that of the ELL students at level 1, 62 students received less than 3 years of service in a school within the United States. The 2017 NYSESLAT results show the majority of students across all grades performing at the Expanding level. 35 percent of our ELLs achieved the Expanding performance level. 81 percent of students performing at Entering or Emerging levels have received 0-3 years of ELL services. The patterns across grade levels and performance show a clear deficiency in reading and writing. Students are performing the weakest in the writing subtest. We use the RLAT from ATS to identify ELL students, their profiency and growth, and their performance on the subtests within the NYSELSAT. This informs our focus for professional development and instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of each year teachers are provided with the data for all of their students from the previous spring's state exams (including math, ELA, and the NYSESLAT). This data is analyzed at department meetings and used to make intervention groups and plan curriculum. We also have an instructional team that meets to review this data and make school-wide decisions based on the findings, such as determining the Instructional Focus or giving input on professional development needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students at the Entering and Emerging Levels of proficiency are scheduled for freestanding ENL as per CR Part 154.2 is provided for small groups of students and students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels. ENL instruction includes stand alone and integrated models and self contained settings based on students' needs. All instruction is delivered by a team of certified professionals. b. TBE program. If applicable. We provide Transitional Bilingual Education in every grade. We also provide transitional bilingual services in a 12.1.1 setting for students with disabilities. Transitional Bilingual Education occurs in Math, LIteracy, Social Studies, and Science. Classes are heterogenous and each class travels as a group for the core subjects. All instruction is delivered by a team of certified professionals. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 76  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? NYSESLAT scores are used to determine a student’s English Proficiency Level. They are then scheduled for ENL, NLA, and HLA according to the guidelines in CR Part 154-2. Students in the Transitional Bilingual program receive Integrated ENL instruction using both models—that of having 1 dually certified teacher, or having 2 teachers co-teach, one of whom is ENL certified—for 180 minutes per week in ELA class. Students who are classified as entering or emerging receive an additional 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction. The process is similar for students who receive ENL instruction and are not in the bilingual program. Students are grouped in homeroom classes according to their English Proficiency Level to better facilitate the scheduling of ENL instruction. A certified ENL teacher then provides integrated ENL in ELA and content-area classes for 90 or 180 minutes per week (depending on the group’s proficiency level), and an additional 180 minutes of stand alone ENL instruction for students who are classified as “entering” or “emerging.” Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The entire ELL team meets weekly for professional development and planning. In the Transitional Bilingual Education program math, science, and social studies instruction occurs in both English and Spanish using the 60-40 model. The goal of the Transitional Bilingual Education program is to transition students to a monolingual setting through language scaffolds aligned to each student's level of proficiency. This is achieved through differentiated instruction and scaffolded supports in math, literacy, social studies, and science. Examples of supports and strategies used include graphic organizers, explicit vocabulary instruction, homogeneous small group work, native language materials. More complex content is taught in the native language. In both TBE and ENL programs students engage in learning activities that require them to practice all four modalities of English language acquistion and students are given differentiated levels of support based on their level of English proficiency. In both TBE and ENL programs teachers provide supports for students to master rigorous Common Core aligned texts. For example, students engage in multiple and close readings of texts and teachers provide vocabulary instruction. Teachers also use guided reading. In TBE and ENL, students at the entering and emerging level are provided with rich texts in their native language. Explicit language goals accompany academic goals in the planning process and these goals are differentiated for the different levels of English Language Learners in each program model. A mix of direct instruction, whole class work, small group work, and individual work are used in the ENL and TBE programs. An emphasis on student directed discussions in all program models provides students with the opportunity to practice speaking and listening skills aligned to the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native language and in English through translated exams, teacher observations, and classroom assessments, and translated state exams as allowed by testing regulations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers analyze the needs of each of the subgroups of ELLs (new arrivals, SIFE 2-3 years of service, 4-6 years of service, long term ELLs, former ELLs) by looking at a variety of data (running records, teacher made assessments, state exam results, NYSESLAT results, native language assessments) and then provide differentiated instruction and targeted intervention to meet those needs. Students' language acquisition is supported through differentiated instruction: differentiated texts and reading 2018-19 CEP 77  groups, native language instruction, texts in native language, explicit ENL instruction, RIGOR program, differentiated guided reading groups, small group math and science intervention, online transaltion tools, leveled libraries in Spanish and English, leveled texts in Spanish and French, process/content charts, and graphic organizers. All students are provided with materials that fall within each student's zone of proximal development in their native language and in the new language. Students are provided with the opportunity to attend targeted intervention groups during the school day, after school, and on Saturdays. Teachers monitor students’ progress through ongoing formative assessments and then provide targeted instruction, differentiated instruction, and intervention to meet those needs. SIFE students receive individualized instruction in class. The teacher provides the student with texts that match the student’s literacy level in Spanish and in English. The students work on reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary in class as well as in targeted after school intervention periods. These students also receive supports as they learn the structures and routines of school. They are also given instruction using the RIGOR program, the Sound Reading Solutions ELL program, or small group guided reading depending on the student’s individual needs. Newcomer ELLs (students in US schools less than 3 years) who are not SIFE are better prepared to do work at grade level in their native language, therefore the plan with these students differs from the plan for the SIFE in the kind of extra instruction they receive. They receive one-on-one instruction and take part in after-school activities with instruction for newcomers geared to maximize English language learning and acquisition. The plan is to have these students utilize their native language skills to aid them in their second language learning so they might be ready to be shifted to monolingual classes after three years of being at our school. Emphasis is put on reading and speaking, aided greatly by a focus on phonics, while Listening (using read-alouds and digital books) and Writing skills are developed concurrently. ELLs who have received services for 4-6 years reeive instruction in bilingual classes or monolingual classes with ESL based on their level of English proficiency. Students who have received instruction for 4-6 years are typicall struggling with the reading and writing modalities on the NYSESLAT and have reading levels that are significantly below grade level. Intensive interventions in reading and writing are provided based on the student’s individual needs. Teachers use a variety of assessment data including ELA and NYSESLAT results, running record data, writing task data, and reading conference data to assess students’ needs. Intervention programs are designed around the students’ needs and might include Rewards to assist students struggling with decoding or guided reading for students whose need work on reading levels and/or reading fluency. All students benefit from whole class and small group vocabulary work. Long-term ELLs are placed in monolingual classes because their academic language is more developed in English than in their native language. They are overwhelmingly advanced on the NYSESLAT, and as test records show, their weakest modality is writing. With a view to their successful performance on the NYSESLAT, the students are invited to attend after school sessions in order to receive support in writing workshop, writing conventions as well as test taking techniques. This complements the work that the students do during their ENL push-in and pull-out periods. All classwork and intervention programs support students’ individual needs with the goal of English proficiency in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Former ELLs receive ELL testing accommodations and 90 minutes of English as a new language for up to 2 years after testing out. Former ELLs receive instruction in monolingual classes and are provided with intervention during after school or small group instructional periods during the school day. Overwhelmingly these students continue to need leveled texts, reading conferences, and guided reading groups to move them towards mastery of grade level texts. ELL scaffolds such as graphic organizers, leveled texts, and vocabulary previews are provided based on each student’s individual needs as determined by diagnostic and formative assesssments such as running records, writing tasks, and reading conferences. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs plan with their general education counterparts as well as with other teachers of SWDs and ELLs to ensure that all students have access to the same rigorous curricular resources. Students who are ELL-SWDs are provided with grade level materials that contain supports such as graphic organizers, scaffolded native language support, and vocabulary previews. These strategies are matched to students' specific needs as per teacher assessments, IEP information, and exam results. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 78  ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment as per each child's specific needs. A child's services are tailored to address his/her specific strengths and areas of need. For example, a child may receive push in or pull out services as per his/her specific needs. A child may be provided with a self-contained setting for part of the school day and a mainstream setting for another subject. These decisions are made collaboratively with the teachers, parent, district representative, school psychologist, and related service providers. Teachers meet on a weekly basis to discuss students’ needs and progress and any programmatic changes that might be needed to address students’ needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the aforementioned student needs, teachers will provide interventions both within the regular instructional period and during small group intervention. Our Title III program will complement our core instruction and will be aimed at providing linguistic support in core academic areas. We use differentiated instruction to address the language needs of these learners, as well as push-in models, literacy classes, and content-area classes. Scaffolded language supports such as sentence starters are used to support language development. Many of our teachers are familiar with students’ first language and provide support as needed; the ENL teacher provides English-language support. In addition to the regular instructional program, we also target our ELL population for Saturday Academy and after school programs, in which we reinforce native and English-language skills. SIFE students receive individualized instruction in class. The teacher provides the student with texts that match the student’s literacy level in the native language and in English. The students work on reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary in class as well as in targeted after school intervention periods. These students also receive supports as they learn the structures and routines of school.Newcomer ELLs who are not SIFE are better prepared to do work at grade level in their native language, therefore the plan with these students differs from the plan for the SIFE in the kind of extra instruction they receive. They receive one-on-one instruction and take part in after-school activities with instruction for newcomers geared to maximize English language learning and acquisition. The plan is to have these students utilize their native language skills to aid them in their second language learning so they might be ready to be shifted to monolingual classes after three years of being at our school. Emphasis is put on Reading and Speaking, aided greatly by a focus on phonics, while listening (using read-alouds and books on tape) and writing skills are developed concurrently. Newcomer and beginner ELLs who need support in phonemic awareness are enrolled in the Sound Reading Solutions program. The majority of long-term ELLs are placed in monolingual classes because their academic language is more developed in English than in their native language. They are overwhelmingly advanced on the NYSESLAT, and as test records show, their weakest modality is writing. With a view to their successful performance on the NYSESLAT, the students are invited to attend after school sessions in order to receive support in writing workshop, writing conventions as well as learning test taking techniques. This complements the work that the students do during their ENL push-in and pull-out periods. Students who need support with decoding and fluency use the Sound Reading Solution program. Students with special needs receive services according to their IEP requirements. If they are SIFE students, they receive the services described above. They also receive counseling services provided by school staff. MS 324 has implemented an extensive program using the writing workshop format for all ELLs, since they generally show deficiencies in their writing skills. Writing workshop entails students generating multiple drafts of the same project using editing skills to produce a standard final product. Writing Workshops are typical components of ELA and ESL instruction. Writing is also supported in Science and Mathematics and the techniques learned in writing workshops are used for projects in these subjects. Small Group InterventionDepending on the academic level of the students, special pull-out periods have been implemented to address the needs of the students. After initial testing, low performing students are enrolled in a program structured to improve reading and writing skills. The monolingual and bilingual Literacy teachers provide targeted interventions for all ELLs after school, before school, and on Saturday. These students are selected using Teacher’s College Reading Assessments, state test scores, DYO assessments, classroom work, and teacher observations. These intervention programs emphasize reading strategies, vocabulary enhancement, and writing skills. In terms of writing skills development, reading summaries, character descriptions and identification of plot elements are emphasized. A morning literacy and math program taught by two certified bilingual teachers and one certified special education teacher for 40 students from October to June will be provided Monday through Thursday from 7:45 am to 8:30 am to provide instruction to increase vocabulary, and the fluidity and automaticity of ELL reading and writing. Based on running records, interim assessment and review of student work, vocabulary, fluency and decoding are areas that ELLs in grades 6-8 have the most difficulty in when reading in English. Based on NYSESLAT results writing is another area of difficulty for ELL students. Reading and writing are the students’ greatest 2018-19 CEP 79  areas of need in grades 6-8. The results of the 2016 math interim assessments and teacher made science assessments indicate that new arrival ELLs lack content area vocabulary skills in English and have difficulty writing explanations of math processes. They also indicate that the majority of ELLs in grades 6-8 lack basic math and science skills and need additional instruction to meet more advanced standards. Our ELL SIFE students lack basic math skills as well as native language and target language skills. A Saturday program will be provided by three teachers from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm beginning in November and continuing to June. During these Saturday sessions, teachers will provide additional instructional time in math and reading. There will be three classes. Based on review of student work, students need support in reading and English language acquisition, basic math skills and their application to support more advanced mathematical understanding, social studies and science. An afterschool literacy and math intervention program led by 3 teachers will be held from 3:00-4:00 and will supplement the Saturday program. During this time teachers will provide small group instruction in math and reading that will be targeted to students' individual needs. These needs will be identified through ongoing assessments. The Sound Reading Solutions program will be implemented two times a week for students who need work on phonemic awareness. All instruction will be provided by highly qualified, certified teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year we are implementing English 3D for our long term ELLs and Sound Reading Solutions for our beginner and SIFE ELLs. Additionally teachers will continue to align their units, lessons, and interventions with the CCLS to ensure that students master the more rigorous standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As ELLs make up a high percentage of our student population, we keep their learning needs in mind when developing school programs. We create and offer programs that are of high interest to ELLs, both in terms of cultural relevancy as well as academic needs. Examples of afterschool clubs deisgned to meet the needs of ELLs includes peer math tutoring, a homework help and sports club, and a soccer club. In order to ensure a high level of participation, teachers and administrators reach out to students and parents about the various programs being offered. ELLs are provided with intervention programs before school and after school that target the needs of specific groups. The after school and supplemental services offered to students are as follows: a morning math intervention program is offered 4 times a week, science intervention is provided 3 times a week, an after school math intervention program is provided 3 times a week, after school guided reading intervention occurs twice a week, and Saturday intervention (math, literacy, Science) occurs once a week. ELLs are encouraged to join extracurricular clubs such as the ones described above. Other examples of clubs include musical theater, guitar, debate, and book clubs. Students are also invited to attend programs through our community based organization, Children's Aid Society. Saturday metro cards are provided to students to ensure students can travel to and from programs. Parent outreach is done by the parent coordinator and teachers to ensure that families are aware of intervention opportunities. Outreach is done over the phone, electronically via Teacherease, and through back-packed flyers. All outreach is done in both English and Spanish. If a parent speaks a language other than Spanish, translators are used to make phone calls in the home language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Independent reading books are an essential component of the program for ELLs. Students are assessed throughout the year and as they advance in reading levels they need additional independent reading books. Students’ levels range from level D to Z and each student needs a large volume of texts on his/her level in order to gain the skills and knowledge necessary to advance to the next reading level. A greater number and variety of non-fiction texts for all subject areas are needed as students work towards meeting the common core standards. Technology based applications such as Sound Reading Solutions, Rosetta Stone and Khan Academy are also an essential component of the instructional program. Ipad applications enhance student learning by providing hands on visuals, individualized interventions, and scaffolded supports such as online translation 2018-19 CEP 80  tools. We have the Connected Math program in both English and Spanish for students to use side by side. Other intervention materials include Sound Reading Solutions and Do the Math. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the transitional bilingual program home language support is provided by the classroom teacher through NLA instruction and Spanish supports such as translated texts, online translation tools, vocabulary instruction, work in Spanish and English, and translated exams. Students who receive ENL receive support through vocabulary instruction, translated texts, and translated exams as needed. Some students use handheld translator/dictionary technology devices. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All intervention programs are aligned to the CCLS grade level standards. When ELL students read below grade level the school purchases texts appropriate for the student's age and instructional level with the end goal of the student reading at or above grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The facilities we share include a gymnasium, cafeteria, and auditorium. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New students attend an open house at the beginning of the school year where they are able to learn about the school's instructional program, academic opportunities, and extracurricular programs. When students are enrolled later in the year the parent coordinator meets with families and provides them with information about the school. Additionally teachers reach out to new families to welcome them to the school. In order for parents to understand all three program choices, they are invited to meet with the Bilingual Education Coordinator within a week of their children’s admission to learn about the school programs and facilities it offers its students. This proces is ongoing throughout the year. The Assistant Principal, Sandra CApers, the parent coordinator, Judy Ortega, and/or the ENL teacher, Samuel Amador, meet with families within 10 days of admission to discuss the ELL program choices. Apart from being shown the video and meeting personally with the staff during the first 10 days at the school, the parents are also invited to two ELL Informational Parent Conferences. In these conferences they have an opportunity to view the video as a group and discuss its content and the TBE and ENL programs with each other as well as with the Bilingual Coordinator/Assistant Principal, Sandra Capers, the school’s Parent Coordinator, Judy Ortega, and the ENL teacher, Samuel Amador. The parent coordinator, teachers, and assistant principal collaborate to reach out to parents and inform them of the meetings via email, phone, and written notices. At the meeting families are also shown a NYC Department of Education video explaining in detail the choices of program their children have as ELLs in a New York City school. This video is shown in a variety of languages, including Spanish. The families complete the program selection forms during the 1:1 meetings or during the group meetings and the child is placed in the appropriate program. Outreach is done by the parent coordinator and the teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 2018-19 CEP 81  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is held weekly to enable our teachers to identify and target the language needs of our students. It is also used to bring instruction in line with the relevant Common Core Learning Standards and practices. The Professional Development group is led by Principal Janet Heller and Assistant Principals Diana Trautner and Sandra Capers, in collaboration with Math and Literacy Coaches. This year and next year PD will also be facilitated by Sarah Selinger from the office of ELLs. She led PD focused on improving questioning and discussion as well as increasing student engagement. Included in Professional Development are all teachers who teach ELLs, which includes ELA, ENL, Math, Science, Social Studies and Arts teachers in bilingual and monolingual classes. We are also working Weekly Professional Development is also provided for paras and support specialists. Professional development supports all teachers and staff (ELL licensed and other licenses) in providing high quality instruction in students’ identified areas of need. Teachers of bilingual and monolingual classes attend professional development together during weekly common preps. All professional development is planned with the goal of effectively implementing the Common Core Learning Standards for all students. During PD sessions, ELL personnell examine student needs relative to the common core learning standards and students’ English needs. Teachers receive PD on the following topics: strengthening vocabulary in the content areas, CCLS shifts, developing reading fluency, using guided reading to increase reading comprehension and automaticity, close reading of rigorous texts, scaffolds that support mathematical inquiry and problem solving, and improving student writing across disciplines. In these professional development sessions teachers participate in a variety of research based learning activities such as collaborative inquiry, examining student work, aligning instruction with the common core, planning differentiated instructional supports for ELLs, examining instructional practices using the Danielson framework, engaging in study groups using scholarly texts, and and planning assessments related to the learning goals. Planning meetings are held once a week to enable our teachers to identify and target the language needs of our students based on assessment of student work. Content area teachers meet weekly to plan instruction and formative assessments to monitor students' acquisition of the target language as well as the subject area material. Paraprofessionals attend PD sessions on topics such as working with beginning readers , questioning techniques for ELLs , working with ELLs with the common core standards, and assisting ELLs with conceptual mathematics . A minimum of one 40 minute session a month will be devoted to these ELL strategies.The literacy coach, math coach and Assistant Principal provide ongoing professional development on ENL strategies to support ELL learning for literacy and math bilingual and ENL teachers. Teachers attend sessions led by consultants from the National Writing Project and Math in the City that target skills such as argument writing in the content areas, and leading discussions to develop numeracy skills. Teachers participate in study groups and read current research on ELL strategies and then use that information to adjust instruction. Teachers participate in intervisitations to provide feedback on Common Core aligned instruction and to learn best practices for implementing instructional shifts. Teachers meet and analyze Common Core aligned student work and use that information to adjust lesson and unit plans and to form intervention groups. Some examples of specific activities include analyzing and developing mathematical tasks that allow for multiple solution paths and connection-making, and analyzing and creating argument-writing tasks in literacy and science. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirements outlined in CR Part 154.2 are imbedded in our professional development sessions as per the descriptions outlined in the answers to question 1 above. The Literacy/Social Studies coach, Math/Science coach, assistat principals provide professional development on ENL strategies to support ELL learning in all content areas. ENL and Bilingual teachers attend one content area PD and one ELL-focused PD session each week. Teachers read current ELL research and use that information to adjust instruction. Teachers analyze the work of ELL students and collaboratively plan strategy groups or interventions to address students' needs. This professional development is provided as a regular part of the weekly schedule througout the school year and is supplemented by DOE PD on ELL instructional stratgies. Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 82  are provided PD by the coaches and administration. Additionally, all teachers are provided with professional development on strategies to support students with transitioning to more independence in middle school. For example, teachers receive professional development on Teach LIke a Champion strategies such as no opt out and SLANT. At weekly interdisciplinary grade team meetings teachers plan advisory lessons aligned to students' social emotional needs. Records for professional development activities such as agendas, notes, and attendance are kept both electronically and in a binder by the coach or assistant principal coordinating the PD. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers of ELLs and the ELL coordinator use weekly Parent Outreach time to communicate with parents and discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. All parent communication is provided in the preferred language and all communication is logged by the teachers. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school hosts monthly workshops for parents. The school hosts 4 ELL specific workshops and 2 trips to build community and improve students’ academic outcomes including a visit to a college campus for students and parents. The school hosts an introduction to middle school workshop where families can learn about ELL program options, school policies, and where they will also be able to meet with teachers to begin to build the school – home community. Families are invited to attend workshops on high school and college including a workshop detailing the high school admissions process, a workshop where students are mentored by former middle school students, and a workshop where families are given time to work on high school applications and receive individual and small group support. The coaches and teachers will provide a workshop on strategies for improving at home reading. The bilingual coordinator and the parent coordinator collaborate to target all parents of ELLs and aim to have a minimum of 20 parents attend each workshop. All workshops are presented in English and Spanish. Parents are also involved in the school through volunteer opportunities and family teacher conferences. Parents with a preferred language other than Spanish are provided an on-staff interpreter if we have one. If not, we use the NYCDOE over the phone interpretation service. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 83 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janet Heller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 84  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 324 School DBN: 06M324 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Janet Heller Title Principal Sandra Capers Assistant Principal Judy Ortega Parent Coordinator Samuel Amador ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jasmine Batista Parent Thelma Dolmo Teacher/Subject Area Juan Delacruz Teacher/Subject Area Gina Salerno Coach Coach Aristotles Henriquez School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 9/11/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 85  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M324 School Name: Patria Mirabal Middle School Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Judy Ortega Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A Parent Home Language Survey is completed by every parent with the assistance of the parent coordinator and/or social worker. Regular mail to parents about school activities is written in Spanish and English. In house translators translate all correspondence using clear and simple language for all outgoing correspondence. ATS reports such as the RESI are used to determine the home language of incoming and current students when distributing mailings, making parent phone calls, or determining translation/interpretation needs for parent workshops and meetings. The student emergency contact cards are another source of information about parents' spoken and written language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 86 Language 0.54 2 ARABIC FRENCH ENGLISH SPANISH 2 2 127 241 0.54 0.54 34.14 64.78 0.54 2 34.14 64.78 127 241 Percent Written Written Preferred Preferred Oral Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name School Calendar Welcome To School: Principal's Message Parent Handbook Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September 7 September 5 translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents have already been translated into Spanish by school staff. French translations 2018-19 CEP 87 of all documents will be completed by staff by August 1st. Arabic translations of all documents will be completed by August 1st using Big Word translations services. Cell Phone Contract Parent Leadership Group Registration Information September 7 September 7 Respect for All Emergency Readiness September 7 Free Breakfast and Lunch Letter New York Citywide Behavorial Expectations High School Admissions Process and Deadlines After School Program Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities September 7 September 7 September 7 Translation and Interpretation Services Pamphlet September 11 NYC Special Education Guide for Families Achieve New York City Guide September 7 6 th Grade Camping Trip and Potluck Flyer September 7 2018-19 CEP 88  6 th Grade Welcome Packet and Handbook Parent Workshop Flyers September 7 Teacherease Workshop Flyer September 7 Saturday Tutoring Flyer High School Workshops Promotion Requirements September 11 September 7 Daylight Savings Reminder September 7 Medicaid Reimbursement Forms Parent Teacher Conference Flyers Curriculum Night June 13 and ongoing Monthly 2018-19 CEP 89  After School Clubs 8 th Grade Activities October 4 Title I and III Workshop October 4 Vision Testing Information Promotion in Doubt Letters Kaplan Parent Meeting Flyer School Survey Information IEP meeting notices Two in October, one in December, one in January, one in June October 4 March Ongoing 2018-19 CEP 90  New York State Testing Dates Regents Test Information Book Fair and Reading Letter Parent Association Elections Washington D.C. Trip Information Session International Refugee Youth Summer Academy Workshop Flyer Field Test Information 6 th grade Parent Orientation Flyer November, March, May September 11 October October November December February 2018-19 CEP 91  High School Process Help Day Flyer High School Books Field Trip Permission Slips April April Ongoing School announcements emailed through Teacherease March CEC Workshop Information; Zumba Class Flyers: Parent Association Meeting Information: May May May 2018-19 CEP 92  Parent Workshop Flyer: May May June June June 2018-19 CEP 93  June Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Monthly 2018-19 CEP 94  Monthly 2018-19 CEP 95  2018-19 CEP 96  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences Monthly parent workshops Curriculum Night 6 th Grade Clearpool Camping Trip Workshop and Potluck Parent Leadership Group September, November, March, and May. September October 2018-19 CEP 97  Weekly on Thursdays for 12 weeks Title 1 Workshop: November Title III workshop: November ELA workshop: At home reading strategies: January High school workshops: September 29, October 6, October 14, November 4, November 28 High School Application Workshop for 7 th Grade: April Kaplan Workshop: April International Refugee Summer Program Workshop: June Special Education and High School Workshop: May 6 th Grade Parent Orientation: June Washington D.C. Workshop: May High School Process Help Day with RSCN for rising 8 th graders: June 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff members are on-hand to call families in their preferred language of Spanish or French. DOE over the phone translation services will be used for Arabic. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff will receive a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 in the Staff Handbook at the beginning of the school year. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be discussed during staff PD at the beginning of the year. Included will be resources for over the phone translation and a list of available staff translators and interpreters. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 98  The welcome poster is displayed at the entrance to the school. The Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access is distributed in September in the parents' home language. The palm card has been distributed to all staff. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Information is gathered from the yearly parent survey and at parent surveys from parent workshops. Additionally the school staff will ask parents for their feedback on the quality and availability of services. The parent coordinator will call all parents to ensure that they know of the services available and to ask them if additional services are needed. Surveys will be provided in English, French, and Spanish as translated by staff members. For Arabic we will use Big Word Interpreting services. 2018-19 CEP 99 
