2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M328 School Name: M.S. 328 - MANHATTAN MIDDLE SCHOOL FOR SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Principal: OLGA QUILES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Manhattan Middle School for Scientific Inquiry 310600010328 6-8 School Number (DBN): 06M328 401 West 164 th Street, New York, NY 10032 (917) 521-2508 (917) 521- 7797 Phone Number: Fax: James Cole JCole3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ms. Olga Quiles Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Chevelle McKeever Rosa Torres ChevelleMckeever Rosa Torres Warner Uribe Geographical District: 6 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway New York, NY 10033 Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917) 521-3757 Phone Number: (917) 521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (917) 339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Olga Quiles ChevelleMckeever Rosa Torres Barbara Rivera Rosa Torres Warner Uribe Michelle Hicks Jasmine Dones William Piedrahita *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent/Secretary Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Ashley Guilamo Nancy Gomez JosefinaFransisco Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Teacher Member/ parent Member/parent Member/teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview CMSP 328 advocates for excellence in each of our diverse and unique learners. We do this in partnership with students, parents, teachers, staff, administration and the local community by supporting their academic, social, and emotional needs and growth. We provide a range of rigorous, real-world learning opportunities for all students with emphasis in mathematics and science to prepare them to become empathetic citizens and life-long learners that are 2018-19 CEP 9  informed, responsible, and actively engaged. Our students will strive to make positive, value-added changes to their local, state, national, and world communities for the purpose of improving everyone's quality of life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CMSP 328 is located in the community of Washington Heights and draws students from here as well as the Inwood, Harlem, and Bronx communities. These communities have undergone demographic shifts that mirror changes that are occurring in New York City generally. CMSP 328’s student population is diverse by every measure: Our current enrollment is 247 students from the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Columbia, Ecuador, Mexico, Haiti, Guyana, Yemen, and the United States. Our largest language group is represented by speakers of Spanish with over 100 students. A notable demographic shift is the increase in the number of Arabic speaking students (we currently have 11 Arabic speaking students). Another represented language group speaks Haitian-Creole. According to the Ethnic Code Report, our demographic statistics are: 3% Asian, 15% Black, 81% Hispanic, and 1% Other. Over the last several years, MS 328 has also implemented many initiatives that support our students' academic and social-emotional growth and a positive, supportive school culture. We work with the "whole family", providing resources that can assist with the school community and home. The school's Welcome Center serves as a hub where families can access our Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator. School administration has an open door policy for families and teachers are accessible weekly during Tuesday Parent Outreach and at other times by appointment. Families also have access to their child's academic data through the Skedula portal. School-day programs: Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) was re-launched in September 2017 with follow-up sessions in December 2017 and February 2018. A team of teachers and staff (including the dean and guidance counselor) will lead in establishing the behavioral supports and social culture needed for all students to achieve social, emotional and academic success. Attention is focused on creating and sustaining primary (school-wide), secondary (classroom), and tertiary (individual) systems of support that improve lifestyle results (personal, health, social, family, work, recreation) for all youth by making targeted misbehavior less desirable and positive behavior more functional. Small group instruction has been scheduled into the day program so that students can receive targeted interventions in a small group setting. Teachers work together to identify students for small group instruction and regularly access their progress. In collaboration with the America Reads program and New York University, tutors work within our classrooms to provide academic support to individuals and small groups. 2018-19 CEP 10  Creative Arts Work provided after school arts programming including an 8 session class on urban design. During the school day, an art class was also scheduled. The Mighty Milers is a running program for kids of all fitness levels from pre-kindergarten through 8th grade. It is designed to get kids moving and prevent obesity and illness. Participation in Mighty Milers helps kids build their self-esteem, and learn to make and reach personal goals. Teachers will use the i-Ready program in support of student data collection and focused interventions. We have a longstanding relationship with New York - Presbyterian Hospital and their School Based Clinic. The clinic offers a full range of health services. Generation Ready, Behind the Book, and the Literacy Design Collaborative are working with our ELA and Social Studies teachers to assist in the development student-centered, engaging reading and writing curriculum. Parent Engagement: We have established partnerships with families to communicate consistently high expectations. At the beginning of the year, a family contract is distributed to our families in both Spanish and English outlining school rules, school mission, and grading policy. Teachers and members of the School Based Support Team reach out to parents via phone calls, emails, and meetings to ensure that lines of communication are open to support student progress. Our automated telephone system also communicates information to our families. Our Parent Association schedules monthly PA meetings during the day and evening to accommodate scheduling needs of our parents. We understand that student achievement is the core of everything we do at CMSP 328 and have implemented the following initiatives in support of students and families: Parents and students have access to our online data system called Pupilpath, a part of the Skedula platform. Grades, attendance data, and anecdotals are regularly updated by teachers. 2018-19 CEP 11  During curriculum nights, our parents meet their children's teachers and learn about curriculum and the expectations for each subject area. On select nights, workshops in math, ELA, and "supporting your child at home" are held. After school and Saturday programs provide a range of learning opportunities for our students Monday through Friday and on weekends. In addition to these extended day programs, we hold a "winter academy", three half-days of instruction during the mid-winter recess in February. The CHAMPS Middle School Sport and Fitness League is an after school initiative of the New York City Department of Education that promotes physical activity among children going through the critical years of middle school. We currently have basketball and dance/cheerleading programs supported by CHAMPS. In addition, the school has an ongoing relationship with the Alvin Ailey Dance theatre which provides an after school dance program for our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Of our total student population, 131, or 53%, are considered ELLs. This number is broken down into the following categories:  6% are SIFE students who have interrupted educational backgrounds.  13% are long term ELLS. CMSP 328 is a Title I school with over 93% receiving free or reduced lunch. Of our total population of students, 34%, have IEPs which is above both district and citywide averages. Our students with IEPs receive a range of mandated programs and services including ICT, 12:1:1, one to one paras, counseling, speech, SETSS, assistive technology, adaptive physical education and occupational and physical therapy. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past school year, CMSP 328 has made progress on the following elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative teachers - Teachers collaborate regularly to plan curriculum and review assessments using time that is programmed into the schedule. An area of special attention was collaboration in the Integrated Co-Teaching and bilingual settings where teacher teams work together to plan and present instruction. 2018-19 CEP 12  Rigorous instruction - We have made progress on two important elements of rigorous instruction. Assessments are more consistent across classes and more closely aligned to curriculum. Collaborative group work is now used regularly in all classes due to the institution of school wide practices in collaborative group work. Strong Family - Community Ties - During the 2017-2018 school year, we have increased parental involvement One factor that led to this increase is organizing events using a school calendar that is planned in advance. We have also offered high interest workshops where families and students attend ELA and math workshops together. In addition, our open school nights feature student-led conferences as well as opportunities for families to choose their workshop session. Our phone messaging system and Skedula/Pupilpath platforms facilitate regular communication with families as does our Tuesday Family Outreach time. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will focus on the following elements of The Framework: Based on our 2018 Quality Review Report, Instructional Cabinet input, and observations of teacher practice, our area of focus will continue to be rigorous instruction. While we have made some progress in this element, more work needs to be done. We will work with teachers to plan lessons that more deeply develop our students' critical thinking skills through activities that are more engaging and project - based and therefore more rigorous. Assessments will be aligned to this curriculum by emphasizing measures that are performance based and that emphasize problem solving. Part of making instruction rigorous is using data to better understand our student's needs. To this point, we will increase the role of the instructional cabinet, making it the primary body for analyzing student data, disseminating this data to teachers, and planning reviews of student work with staff. In addition, we will make interventions and enrichment more closely aligned to data analysis, targeting individual student needs. Collaborative teachers - There is a baseline of collaboration among teachers and administrators at CMSP 328 but but we need to continue to make progress with this element specifically in the area of internal accountability. Our guiding questions will be, "how do we make all staff fully participating stakeholders in our students' education? How do we encourage distributed leadership and a positive work culture where stakeholders are willing to hold each other accountable?" 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M328 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 229 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 31 13 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 97.8% % Reduced Lunch 50.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 82.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 6% 41% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 10.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 26 89.1% 1.3% 35.8% 12.7% 3.9% 0.4% 2 41% 3 10.4% 22% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on Advance observations of teacher practice and with input from our CMSP's instructional cabinet, with regard to rigorous instruction, our strengths are: a. More consistent assessments and use of rubrics across classes and departments. An average of 2018 MOTP ratings in Advance, Domain 3d (assessment), was in the effective range. b. More effective, consistent use of the Workshop Model including designated time for individual and collaborative engagement. An average of 2018 MOTP ratings in Advance, Domain 3c (student engagement), was in the effective range. Student data, generated by the scores on the 2018 State Math and ELA exams shows that the majority of our students are scoring level 1. A sample of student data indicates: a. 41% scored a level 1 on the ELA exam while 55% scored a level 1 on the math. b. For ELA and math, 27% and 31% scored a level 2 respectively. c. 6% scored a 3 on the ELA and 14% scored the same on the math assessment. d. 8% in ELA and 4% in math achieved a level 4. Our theory of action is that consistent, data-informed questioning will support student progress. Consistent question is grounded in a teacher's knowledge of individual student needs, grounded in classroom level goal setting, and supported by ongoing formative and summative assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as indicated in the NYSED Gains report: 2018-19 CEP 15  a. there will be a 15% increase in the number of students scoring proficient on the State ELA exam, b. there will be a 20% increase in the number of students scoring proficient on the State Math exam. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in targeted review of student performance on assessments from the 2017-2018 school year including item analysis of the state tests, the Measure Of Student Learning assessments, and other school based assessments including class scores from 2017-2018. Special emphasis will be given to our subgroups of students who are historically making inadequate academic progress including SWDs, SIFE students, and English Language Learners. Administration will conduct formal and informal observations of teacher practice. Teacher teams will participate in inter-visitations. Teachers, parents, students and other stakeholders will participate in regular learning walks driven by data-based "research questions." After evaluating students’ needs, math and English Language Arts teachers will participate in a review of their units and revise based on their assessment of student challenges and strengths. Teachers will use structured protocols to evaluate student work products. As mentioned, special emphasis will be given to our subgroups of students who are historically making inadequate academic progress including SWDs, SIFE students, and English Language Learners. Periodic open school nights will inform parents of school academic priorities, programs planned to address students’ needs and strategies for working with students at home. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? July 2018-October 2018 and ongoing School administration, school cabinet, teacher teams. Teachers of all subjects Students with disabilities. and English Language Learners. Teachers of all subjects, general education students, students with disabilities. and English Language Learners. Parents, all students, students with Beginning July 2018 and ongoing School administration, school cabinet, department leads, teachers October 2018-June 2019 School administration, school cabinet, 2018-19 CEP 17  During Family Outreach times, and Parent Teacher Conferences, staff will review grades, portfolios, and progress of individual students with families. disabilities, and English Language Learners department leads, teachers Our Professional Learning Community time will be used for periodic revaluation of student progress based on standardized and school-developed assessments . This will include school wide, performance-based, midyear assessments at the end of January 2018. Ongoing revising of units will be made based on student outcomes. The school instructional cabinet will take on a key role as a clearinghouse for the review and presentation of student data. This process will engage teachers in planning targeted interventions and enrichment for our students especially in small group pull-outs, in special education settings like ICT, after school, and Saturday. Teachers of all subjects October 2018-June 2019 Teachers of all subjects, August 2018 - June 2019 all students School administration, school cabinet, department leads, teachers School administration, school cabinet, department leads, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Periodic open school nights will inform parents of school academic priorities, programs planned to address students’ needs and strategies for working with students at home. During Family Outreach times, and Parent Teacher Conferences, staff will review grades, portfolios, and progress of individual students with families. Family Outreach will be scheduled each Tuesday from 2:30 to 3:10pm. In addition, monthly School Leadership Team and Parents Association meetings will be held. The SLT meetings will be coordinated by the school Principal. The PA will be organized by the school's Parent Coordinator and the PA President. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Outreach, After-School and Saturday Academies, as well as academies held during the winter break. Programmed small group pull out periods. Professional Learning sessions, district resources, department meetings, human resources, instructional materials and digital technology resources, and schedule adjustments to accommodate professional development sessions. Teacher per session will be offered for our After School and Saturday Academy. Assistant Principal will supervise both programs for per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as measured by mid-year assessments in ELA and math, and when compared with State ELA and math exam data, there will be a 10% (ELA) and 15% (math) increase in student proficiency. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be assessed using a school wide cross-curricular performance tasks as well as other in-class assessments and iReady data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The 2016-2017 school year presented a unique challenge. MS 328 and 326 merged. This was a difficult transition for all stakeholders. Our students, especially those 7th and 8th graders formally from MS 326, were particularly challenged. During the 2017- 2018 school year, we continued to establish clear expectations for instruction with our staff and community guidelines with our students. Our 2018 Quality Review Report noted that in both "maintaining a culture of mutual trust" and "establishing a culture for learning" was proficient. There are other indicators of modest progress. During the 2016-2017 school year, we had 12 principal suspensions and 14 superintendent suspensions for total of 26. We did not achieve our goal to lower the suspension rate by 10%. Instead, our overall suspension rate increased by approximately 70%. During the 2017-2018 school year, our suspension data was exactly the same as the previous year and remained flat. When our enrollment growth is factored in, an increase of approximately 30% to 247 students, a fuller picture develops. In order to further develop in this area, we must continue to establish our commitment to the belief that children learn best when they are in a safe, nurturing environment where they are consistently engaged and challenged to meet standards and are provided with the supports necessary to meet these goals. Standard-based strategies to promote higher order thinking skills also contribute to classroom environments that foster positive student self-concept and productive collaboration. These elements of the Framework for Great Schools include:  Setting Instructional Outcomes - Lesson planning includes CCLS-aligned learning targets and objectives. Learning goals align with grade level and school wide goals.  Establishing a Culture for Learning - Teachers develop classroom rapport, structure, roles that support and develop a trusting but challenging learning environment. Our expectation is that all students demonstrate progress and learning at higher levels is across grade levels.  Developing a plan of Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) that will facilitate our efforts to build a school culture in which students understand their responsibilities and where positive behaviors are identified, acknowledged, and supported. 2018-19 CEP 20  The school has already taken steps toward this goal:  We have identified school “Core Values” which detail the characteristics we will emphasize as we build a supportive school culture.  We have created a school “behavioral matrix.” Posted throughout the school, it details how students are expected to behave in different places in the school building.  We have piloted school wide incentives including student of the month, trips and celebrations for improved attendance, awards assemblies, "caught you in the act" coupons, and student mentorship. These were supplemented by monthly town hall meetings, student achievement awards, and attendance incentives.  PBIS was relaunched at our school and a committee formed to quide our work in Positive Behavior Supports. In addition to these student focused initiatives, teachers will receive professional development in:  PBIS  Respect for All  Working with students who have experienced trauma  Conflict de-escalation  Social - emotional intelligence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, with the implementation of a positive behavior intervention system and a school-wide program of progressive behavioral rewards and consequences, the number of incidents - as measured by suspensions - will decrease by at 20%. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers and administration will review student data for returning and newly registered students. This will include a review of data for overage students. Students with Disabilities, Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), English Language Learners and Students in Temporary Housing. Current school protocols for Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports will be reviewed and subject to modification with an emphasis on teaching and acknowledging positive behaviors. Teachers will receive professional development on implementing Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, administration, Students with disabilities, English Language Learners Teachers, administration, guidance counselors 9/3/18 - 10/12/18 Teachers, administration, guidance counselor, dean 9/3/18 - 10/12/18 Teachers, administration, guidance counselor, dean Measures of progress will be used including teacher anecdotals in Skedula, surveys, and informal and formal observations. Parent meetings will involve families in the process. Families will be informed of the initiative and asked for feedback. Families 9/10/18 - 11/27/18 Building on work done the previous year, we will build consistency in our Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports program. A PBIS committee will communicate expectations, procedures, and protocols starting in September. This will include a mentorship program, monthly town halls, regular advisory meetings, restorative practices implementation, and a comprehensive, school wide incentive program. Teachers, all students 9/4/48 - 6/10/19 Teachers, administration, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, dean Teachers, administration, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, students, dean, PBIS Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 10th, 2018 and continuing through May 24th, 2019, we will hold regular parent meetings where we will:  Inform parents of our initiative to improve the overall school culture and make the school environment more supportive.  Review our letter to parents and students detailing school expectations for behavior.  Engage parents in our incentive program as volunteers for celebratory events  Survey parents and students regularly to get their feedback on the school's efforts to make the environment more supportive for all stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parents Association, parent coordinator, Skedula, SESIS, student records, PBIS resources including State PBIS website, DOE and State scheduled Professional Development sessions, PBIS team, Professional Learning Community, formal and informal observations and feedback, student programs (after school sports, open computer lab, arts program, Beacon Program, Mighty Milers), professional development presented by Manhattan Service Center and ChildMind Institute. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, there will be a 20% decrease in Principal and Superintendent suspensions for the same time period last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using suspension data in the OORS system for September 2018 - February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As noted in the 2018 Quality Review, our school rated proficient in all indicators related to school improvement. However, in indicators related to the instructional core, we consistently were rated developing. There needs to be a stronger connection between our structures for improvement and delivery of instruction. Based on formal and informal observations of school practices, CMSP 328's strengths in the area of teacher collaboration are:  Scheduled meeting times for ELA/social studies, math, science, special education, and the school instructional cabinet. This has led to more coherence in curriculum mapping, assessments (including use of rubric), and instructional expectations for collaborative group work. In special education, we have success in the IEP writing process - which is collaborative - including 100% on time delivery of annual reviews. Formalized, schoolwide expectations for agenda setting and notetaking.   Distributed leadership: Teachers facilitate department meetings and present workshops to their colleagues in our PLC sessions. While there have been successes, the greatest measure of teacher collaboration is student progress. As mentioned earlier, we have seen some progress in ELA class passing rates however in math almost 50% of our students failed their classes for the year. Clearly more work needs to be done to improve student academic progress in all subjects. We need to refine our system designed to engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that continues to promote shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. School and individual teacher development/improvement will be measured against student ELA/Math performance on associated Accelerated Reader, Engage NY, Benchmark, and teacher-made baseline and post assessments . We will design, develop, and deliver a cycle of PDs throughout the school that will be responsive to data from multiple sources including Danielson-based classroom observations, intervisitations and learning walks, and lesson study. The School Instructional Cabinet, we will focus our collaborative efforts on the analysis of student data - from multiple sources - with the goal of improving our interventions and enrichment in small group settings, classrooms (including ICT and small classes), after school, and Saturday. Perhaps the most important indicator of success will be an increase in instruction that is less teacher centered, encourages student questions, engages students in higher order thinking, and contextualizes the content within the real world. Student academic progress - across a spectrum of measurements - as well as observations of teacher practice will be used as indicators of growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as indicated in the NYSED Gains report: a. there will be a 15% increase in the number of students scoring proficient on the State ELA exam, b. there will be a 20% increase in the number of students scoring proficient on the State Math exam. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Student assessment data will be reviewed to develop a clear picture of student academic needs. School cabinet will guide data gathering and evaluation process. Information will be delegated to departments to feed into the unit planning process. Benchmark assessments will be administered to increase data set related to student academic needs. School cabinet will guide data gathering and evaluation process. Information will be delegated to departments to feed into the unit planning process. Students Students Student academic needs will be categorized and students will be programmed for pull-out, small group sessions. After school and Saturday school groups will be scheduled. Students Teachers will plan curriculum that focuses on deep understanding of content using active engagement, group work, project based learning, and real world connections (such as STEM). Teachers will evaluate student work products using structured protocols (such as the consultancy protocol). Students, teachers Department facilitators will mentor teachers in the unit planning process using protocols such as UBD and UDL. Teacher teams will develop a midterm performance assessment using the New York City performance task as a model. Students, teachers The School Instructional Cabinet will plan and facilitate cycles of student academic data collection and analysis and work with teachers to plan targeted, responsive interventions and enrichment. Students, teachers August 2018 Teacher leaders, administration, school cabinet September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 School cabinet, department leads, administration, teachers School cabinet, administration, teachers, school programmer, parent coordinator, related service providers October 2018 and ongoing School Cabinet, Administration, department leads, teachers December 2018 and January 2019 September 2018 and ongoing School Cabinet, Administration, department leads, teachers School Cabinet, Administration, department leads, teachers 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 2018, we will hold regular parent meetings - including Parent Teacher Conferences and SLT meetings - where we will:  Overview detailing our initiative to improve student performance  Regular, specific, individualized updates on student progress including reviews of student work products  Workshops teaching parents how best to support student academic progress at home (ex. homework help, overview of math and ELA standards). The principal, assistant principal, and parent coordinator will be responsible for oversight of the parent engagement initiative with support of the SLT and PA. Teachers will participate in selected activities such as presenting workshops related to the content areas. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework”, “Framework for New Schools”, teacher leaders, school cabinet, weekly scheduled professional learning and department meetings, administrators, instructional consultants, instructional resources. professional literature, and schedule adjustments. Most importantly, student academic data from multiple sources will be analyzed and will guide the process. These sources include: School created unit assessments including culminating projects State tests  Benchmark assessments    Mid-year, performance-based, cross-curricular assessment  Classwork and portfolios.  iReady Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, based on mid-year performance tasks, and as compared to comparable data from midyear 2017-2018, students will show a 10% improved passing rate in ELA and a 12% improved passing rate in math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 27  The measure that will be used to measure progress will be mid-year performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of a sample of teacher observations indicate an average score of 2.5 in Domain 3. This mirrors findings in our 2018 Quality Review Report where the school was rated developing in the "Instructional Core" indicator. This being noted, observations using the Danielson rubric as well as intervisitations and reports made in cabinet and department meetings, the school strengths related to this Framework element, "Effective School Leadership", are:  A strengthened school cabinet, giving it real decision-making power. The School Cabinet met weekly and planned our professional learning sessions with a focus on data collection, sharing curriculum, and developing a better understanding of the needs of our ELL and special education students. Members of the cabinet, in addition to their work planning professional learning sessions, also delivered numerous professional development sessions for the teaching staff.  Under the leadership of our principal, increased school wide coherence was achieved in the area of assessment including more integration of rubrics in the curriculum with some teachers engaging students in self and peer assessments. Additionally, we implemented school wide practices in collaborative group work. In addition to coherence in student assessment, an increase in expectations and coherence in administration's use of the Advance system can also be noted.  The greatest measure of effective leadership is student progress. We have seen some progress in Math class passing rates as well as a decrease in the number of students scoring below 65 in both math and ELA. Under the leadership of school administration, we will focus our efforts on the analysis of student data - from multiple sources - with the goal of improving our interventions and enrichment in small group settings, classrooms (including ICT and small classes), after school, and Saturday. School administration will ensure that scheduling, budgetary resources, and teacher leadership are focused on this initiative. And with the partnership of the school instructional cabinet, we will solidify expectations for rigorous instruction including using our PLC time to connect student data to curriculum development and improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June 2019, the number teachers with overall ratings of Effective or Highly Effective as measured by Danielson Domain 3 (3b, 3c, 3d) ratings in Advance will increase 33%. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School administrators will conduct classroom observations. They will compile data for co-teachers in Danielson Domain 3 in the Advance system. Domain 3 will be averaged. Administration, teachers September - November 2018 Administration Teacher Domain 3 data will be presented to the school cabinet who will then do an item analysis. School instructional cabinet will specify a list of skills teachers need to develop for effective co-teaching. School administration will conduct another round of observations to determine the efficacy of the professional development and work with the cabinet to determine next steps. Teacher leaders, administration Teachers At the direction of school administration, student assessment data will be reviewed to develop a clear picture of student academic needs. School administration will work with the school cabinet to gather and evaluate student academic data. Students Student academic needs will be categorized and students will be programmed for pull-out, small group sessions. After school and Saturday school groups will be scheduled. Students November 2018 School cabinet, administration Beginning January 2019 School cabinet, administration August 2018 Teacher leaders, administration, school cabinet Beginning September 2018 and ongoing Teachers, teacher leaders, school cabinet, administration Teachers will plan curriculum that focuses on deep understanding of content using active engagement, group work, project based learning, and real world connections (such as STEM). Curriculum development and delivery will be evaluated through observations, lesson study in PLC sessions, and by an analysis of student grades. The school principal will ensure that the schedule, staffing, and budgetary resources, are targeted towards improving student academic performance. Students Beginning June 2018 and ongoing School administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 31  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 2018, we will hold regular parent meetings - including Parent Teacher Conferences and SLT meetings - where we will:  Overview detailing our initiative to improve student performance  Regular, specific, individualized updates on student progress including reviews of student work products  Workshops teaching parents how best to support student academic progress at home (ex. homework help, overview of math and ELA standards). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework”, “Framework for New Schools”, teacher leaders, school cabinet, weekly scheduled PLC and department meetings, administrators, instructional consultants, instructional resources, and professional literature, schedule adjustments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers whose formal and informal observations have been completed will show a 10% increase in average Domain 3 teacher rating. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data averaged for Domain 3 teacher ratings recorded in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 NYC School Survey:  CMSP 328 scored a 3.86 in Strong Family-Community Ties. This score is approaching Exceeding on the scale.  The school scored a 3.55 in Trust. Both indicators show a decrease with the lower score in the area of trust most notable. With this data in mind, our school has identified areas of strength and continuing challenges in our efforts to engage family in the life of the school community: Strengths  The parent coordinator, guidance counselor, principal, dean and teachers maintain regular contact with parents including using our Family Outreach time for parent meetings and outreach.  Our school uses PupilPath to ensure parents have access to real time information on student progress.  We use a phone messaging system to give parents recorded updates on school events and schedule alerts.  Our PA, parent coordinator, and CBOs offer monthly parent workshops on a variety of topics. There were 10 Family workshops held during the 2017-2018 school year. In addition, a Family STEM Fair and ELA and math workshops were also presented.  Our school based clinic provides a gateway for family services off site.  For parent teacher conferences, we use a "student led" conference model. Based on attendance data, there was a 20% increase in parent participation during the 2017 - 2018 school year. Challenges The principle challenge for our parent and community outreach efforts is the effectiveness in communication with parents. We currently use school messenger, Pupilpath, and flyers to reach out to parents. We will continue to use these methods but will work to improve communication by:  Training parents in the use of Pupilpath   Distributing a full year calendar of parent events (this calendar will also be posted on the school website). Improving and updating the CMSP 328 school website In addition, to address the data suggesting a decrease in trust, we will: Initiate a parent survey to poll parents on ways we can improve trust in our school community   Hold a parent - school listening session to discuss the issue 2018-19 CEP 33   Work to improve consistency and follow-up on parent concerns including using the Tuesday Family Outreach time more efficiently. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, a 15% increase in parent participation in school events as measured by monthly logged attendance data. In addition, we will track who is attending workshops and meetings to evaluate whether or not the parents who attend represent our various stakeholder groups. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Invite the parents of new, incoming students to attend a summer meeting where an overview of the school culture and academic program will be communicated. Parents and students Summer 2018 Administration, parent coordinator, teachers Hold a parent open school night where parents will get more familiar with the school’s academic program and have time to review their child’s academic performance with teachers form each subject area. Activate the Parents Association and have regularly scheduled meetings with the group (once monthly and as needed). Increase outreach and participation in meetings. Meetings will include information about school initiatives for the 2017-2018 school year as well as workshops on Pupilpath and School Connect. Parents, students, teachers, and parent coordinator Parents Late September 2018 Parent coordinator, teachers, administration Parent coordinator, teachers, administration Beginning in September and ongoing until June 2019 Plan a full year calendar of parent activities that focus on engaging parents in the school’s academic program and 2018-2019 school initiatives. Parents, teachers, students October – June 2019 Parent coordinator, teachers, administration, Learning Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will work closely with District 6 and our CBO, ACDP/Beacon, to support family and community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 35  Parent coordinator, Parents Association, SLT, Skedula and Pupilpath, teachers, administration, students, after school and Saturday programs, school partner organizations (Beacon, Alvin Ailey, Creative Arts Works), schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 25% increase in attendance at parent events and a 10% increase in the stakeholder groups represented by participating parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring will include regular evaluations of school-offered parent programs. The SLT and Parents Association with the support of the Parent Coordinator will review attendance data from parent programs. Parent surveys will also be provided on an ongoing basis to evaluate the effectiveness of our parent programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State ELA exam, NYSESLAT, MOSL test, benchmark assessments,mid-year performance assessment, iReady Mathematics State math exam, benchmark assessments, mid-year performance assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated readings, interactive writing, computer based programs, graphic organizers, Teachers College method, NYU/America Reads tutors, vocabulary acquisition strategies; Wilson reading strategies, EngageNY Relevant, real-life applications approach to problem solving Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Team-teaching, small group, tutoring, and one-to-one instruction, effective use of paraprofessionals Team-teaching, small group, tutoring, and one-to-one instruction, effective use of paraprofessionals Science Science MOSL, state 8 th grade science exam, classroom based pre-assessments, labs, mid-year performance assessment Social Studies State ELA exam,classroom based pre-After school homework tutorials provided by Beacon and ACDP,CMSPafter school program,Relevant, real-life applications approach to problem solving Non-fiction strategies including note taking Team-teaching, small group, tutoring, and one-to-one instruction, effective use of paraprofessionals Team-teaching, small group, tutoring, and one-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Saturday Academy, After-School, Small Group pullouts, After-School Computer Lab for homework support, special education classes, coordination with the Beacon Program Saturday Academy, After-School, Small Group pullouts, After-School Computer Lab for homework support, special education classes,coordination with the Beacon Program Saturday Academy, After-School, Small Group pullouts, After-School Computer Lab for homework support, special education classes,coordination with the Beacon Program Saturday Academy, After-School, Small Group pullouts, 2018-19 CEP 37 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) After-School Computer Lab for homework support, special education classes,coordination with the Beacon Program School day, parent workshops, outside support services, school based clinic,coordination with the Beacon Program assessments, exit projects, in class assignments,mid-year performance assessment Skedula, teacher anecdotal, student records, Individualized Educational Plans, student interviews, Functional Behavior Assessments/Behavior Intervention Plans, Teacher - Student mentoring and use of graphic organizers instruction, effective use of paraprofessionals Group and individual counseling (based on IEP mandated goals), services provided by school-based clinic; drop-in crisis intervention, Life Skills and Career awareness curriculum, community service, PBIS Small group (2-5 students) and individual counseling both during the regular school day and after school. Low inference classroom observations. Parental outreach and support. Critical support for the development and maintenance of student Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) CMSP 328 currently has 5 students living in Temporary Housing (STH). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. CMSP 328 administration, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator - with support of our CBO ACDP/Beacon and the School Based Clinic - will work to identify students in temporary housing who are not currently living in shelter. All efforts will be made to identify any student living with other family members due to not having their own place to live. A strong effort will be made towards supporting students who do not have their own space to do their homework or a lack of resources within their current environment to excel in school.  Students in temporary housing will be identified by school personnel which includes guidance counselors, social workers, family workers attendance teacher, and members of the pupil accounting personnel team and through coordination activities with other entities and agencies; Students in temporary housing will have full and equal opportunities to succeed in the schools of the LEA;   Parents and guardians and unaccompanied youth are fully informed of all transportation services, including transportation to and from the school of origin or the local school, and other services homeless students are entitled to as stipulated in the McKinney Vento Act.  Enrollment disputes are mediated in accordance with the requirements of the McKinney Vento Act  STH Content Experts provide technical assistance and work directly with schools. The STH Family Assistant will ensure that students identified as STH have basic living and educational supplies. STH Family Assistants will provide direct services to families residing in family shelters managed by the NYC Department of Homeless Services (DHS). In addition, STH Family Assistants meet with school personnel to plan how best to meet the educational and emotional needs of homeless students.  The school will keep supplies on hand (uniforms, notebooks, etc.) and provide them to STH's as needed.  We will continue to operate a school clinic and dental office and provide breakfast in the classroom, free school lunch and snack in our after school program.  We will work with 21st Century and Beacon to extend the school day and provide academic support as well as sports and arts activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 CEP 39 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Provide extensive Professional Development in our PLC sessions including workshops on running records, special education interventions and report writing, behavior management, de-escalation, effective techniques for assessing student work, vocabulary development strategies and more. Ensure that fully licensed teachers are teaching in their certification area. Informal and formal observations using the Danielson Framework. Collaboration amongst teachers via class intervisitation using the lesson study approach. Weekly grade, subject, and planning meetings with a focus on data analysis and unit planning. Mentorship for new teachers and supporting collegial partnerships in the subject area department meetings and PLC sessions. Provide a common prep period by subject and by team enabling teachers to meet and discuss teaching strategies, curriculum development and student issues. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We need to continue our work around developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Framework for Great Schools, 90/90/90 Schools, the 5 Tenets of Successful Schools, the Every Student Succeeds Act, and the Danielson Framework for teaching. We will accomplish this by the use the focused learning walks as part of our ongoing process to support staff. Participants will include the principal, assistant principals, coaches, instructional support specialist, parents, and students. Learning walks will be conducted as one component of the cyclic round of PLCs. Formal and informal observations of instructional practice as well as teacher intervisitations will contribute to our data gathering. 2018-19 CEP 41  A key component in ensuring teachers receive high quality, ongoing professional development – a goal embedded in our desire to improve organizational coherence – is to activate best practices using “teacher experts.” With the support and guidance of the school cabinet – as well as other stakeholders like the network and instructional consultants – and grounded in an item analysis (performed by the Data Team) that identifies targeted student deficits in ELA and Math, we will offer individualized professional development using the variety of scheduled meeting times already in our organizational program. PLC sessions will be offered in cycles that are responsive to student academic needs and informal and formal observations. Teachers will be given structured time to discuss concerns and share best practices. These discussions will be founded in our instructional foci for school year 2018-2019, such as effective, informative, accessible assessments, the development of higher order questioning techniques, and instruction that demonstrates coherence from the beginning of the lesson to the end. To support teachers, and to more effectively support students, paraprofessionals will participate in cycles of PDs that cover such topics as "How to Read IEPs" and "Positive Behavior Management." These pds will align with District 6 initiatives for strengthening professional development for paraprofessionals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 CEP 42  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our School Instructional Cabinet and administration will organize a program of assessments tied to improving student progress through targeted, responsive interventions and enrichment. Using the department structure and PLC sessions, teachers will engage in conversations and planning - using assessment data - to plan curriculum units. Within these units will be incorporated consistent assessment regimes by department using rubrics where indicated. Within departments and PLC sessions, teachers across content areas will plan a cross-curricular, midyear performance assessment tied to a school thematic study. Topics for this whole school study will come from current events such as the climate change, immigration, city planning and other topics that seek to heighten student interest and engagement and that ground our subject area content in real world applications. In the area of formative assessment, we will initiate teacher led discussions on the range of formative assessments and create a school wide protocol detailing the kinds of formative assessments we expect to see in our classrooms. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 175,774.00 0 16,590.00 0 X 0 X 0 2018-19 CEP 43 Column B Section Reference(s) Teacher salaries 0 After School Programs, PD teachers and parents 0  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,274,138.00 x Teachers Salary 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 44  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Community Math and Science Prep, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Community Math and Science Prep will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement a. holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; b. hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; c. encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; d. supporting or hosting Family Day events; e. establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; f. encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; g. providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; h. developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; i. providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand j. initiating the use of School Connect phone app to improve communication; k. improving and updating the school website. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Community Math and Science Prep] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 48  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: According to the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) 2018 a majority of our students are at the transitioning and expanding levels of English Language acquisition. Based on our Analysis of our 2018 NYSESLAT scores also revealed that many of our students are in area of need of support in engaging in academic speaking and writing. To support, our students further develop our ELLs' academic speaking and writing skills, we will utilize the majority of the grant funds to provide direct and targeted small group instruction during our After School and Saturday Academy Programs The after school program will run from October 2018 to April 2019 from 2:30p.m. to 4:00p.m. the duration of the program is 1.5 hours long and it will be on the following days: Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. The after school program will be 65 sessions, the program will end the last week of April.There will be additional funds needed to address the Title III Plan will be found in other school funding sources. During the program will students will receive supplemental stand-alone ENL services for 1 hour and integrated ENL for 1 hour of within the content area of Science or Social Studies. A major goal of the program is to develop our ELL students advanced and disciplinary literacies. Therefore, the ENL teacher and the Social Studies teacher will provide integrated ENL instruction. The teachers who will provide direct instruction to our ENL students are (Ms.Marte) certified in ENL (Ms. Mills)our certified ELA teacher, (Ms. Gonzalez)certified Social Studies teacher, (Ms. Adames) certified ELA with a Bilingual Extention and (Ms. Sanchez) certified SPED with a Bilingual Extension. Instruction will provided in the English language with appropriate scaffolds. and opportunities to use students' home language as an entry point for learning. The materials we will use during our After School program include National Geographic texts, which include rich illustrations to support new language acquisition and project-based learning opportunities that will advance our ENL disciplinary reading and writing skills. While using the National Geographic text, students will learn through projects, which will give the students the tools for research, reasoning and presentation (speaking) skills. Teachers will provide interdisciplinary thematic instruction to offer our ELLs opportunities to use academic language across content-areas. The routines and activities also offered by the program will support teachers in advancing students' English pre-literacy to literacy skills more effectively.. Within the integrated model, the ENL teacher will focus on building students vocabulary and improve their writing skills. Content area teachers will continue to work with students in their area of need. Both teachers will work with students in small groups using a variety of co-teaching models (Two Student Groups, Two Teachers, Two student groups, One teacher pre and re-teaches, One teaches content,etc), . Materials are on-site and at no cost to Title III. During the After School program the ENL and the ELA teacher will group students according to language and literacy needs by using summative assessments NYSESLAT data and formative data collected in the classroom and on IREADY. The ELA and the ENL teachers will focus on building students' productive skills in speaking and writing., particularly with the entering and emerging students. Entering and Emerging ENL students will engage in regular talk routines to 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information support them in writing simple, expanded and complex sentences. Transitioning and expanding students will assist their classmates in the conversation and provide additional scaffolding learning opportunities through modeling. Our Saturday Program will also focus on building our ELL students academic language proficiency in English. Our Saturday Academy will take place on Saturdays from 8:30 am – 12:00 pm., from October 2018 to April 2019 for a total of 22 sessions. The duration of the program will be 3.5 hours. Each class will have approximately 10 students. There will be additional funds needed to address the Title III Plan will be aloted from other school funding sources. The Saturday Academy will be staffed by an ENL certified teacher (Ms. Marte), a math teacher(Mr.Quezada), (Ms.Cosme) teaching HLA, Social Studies (Ms. Gonzalez), and the ELA teacher(Ms.Duran) Instruction will take place in the English. Direct instructional services will also be provided within an integrated ENL model. During Saturday Academy we will focus on building students speaking skills as well as reading and writing, through a debate club. The Saturday Program debate club will enhance speaking and writing along with using research. This will prepare our ELLs for high school and beyond. This will give them the tools for answering open ended questions as well. Students will be introduced to Socratic Seminar in order to enhance their speaking skills. Students will debate on current events, researching topics. The materials that will be used in the program are NEWSELA articles. The articles are based on current events as well as world history. This will allow students to build their vocabulary skills. Students will also work on their note taking skills. They will be able to learn how to annotate the text and identify important evidence from the text. Materials are on-site and at no cost to Title III” Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: M.S. 328 will promote and deliver quality instruction and excellence in education by establishing a professional culture of collaborative planning, examining of pedagogy and curriculum and becoming co-learners with teachers to find ways to transform classroom practices. We will be guided by an analysis of our students’ needs based on student data such as the NYSESLAT as well as the English and Math state exams. The instructional practices used by teachers will be informed by the RIGOR and iReady program. A major goal of our professional learning plan will focus on supporting and deepening teacher knowledge of instructional best practices to meet the diverse linguistic and literacy needs of our ELL students. This learning will equip teachers with strategies and resources to support our students excel academically and linguistically. Our teachers will receive ongoing high quality professional development both inside and outside of the school site. Teachers will meet twice a month to discuss the implementation of the programs, lesson plans, material applications, new studies, requirements, best practices, data, etc. The teachers that will benefit from the professional learning session will include Ms. Duran, Ms.Ramirez, Mr. Quezada, Ms. Marte, Mr. Concepcion, and Ms. Cosme. The PDs are also open to all teachers in MS328. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development Addtionally, teachers will receive professional learning opportunities on Saturdays. The PLOs will be held once a month and they will be at least 1 hour and a half long. The PDs will be provided by ELL Assistant Principal and Instructional Specialist, Mr. Luis Quan. The dates for the PDs are as follows, Saturday, November 17, 2018 Saturday- Language Objective; December 15,2018, Saturday-Using the New Language Progressions to Scaffold learning; January 12-Supporting SIFE students in the classroom; February 9 -Scaffolding close reading for ELLs; March 16, - How to scaffold for ELLs in Writing; April 6 Using the ToMs and PLDs to provide plan for instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: At M.S. 328 parental involvement has been a key component for our students’ successes and accomplishments. Our ELLs program plans to enhance the level of parental involvement by building a strong Family Support Team, which participates in the most diverse aspects of our journey. Our goal is to promote a minimum of 20 hours of meaningful activities for the parents of ELLs with topics related to their children’s academic and linguistic growth. The length of the parent engagement will be at least 2 hours long. The parent engagement will be held monthly in our school. The schedule and topics to be covered "Helping your Child with Homework", Tuesday, Novemeber 13, Tuesday January 9, " Technology Training", Tuesday, February 13, Adult Literacy Classes" . The Family Support Team consists of an administrator, 1 bilingual special education teacher, 1 ENL Teacher, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, parent association representative and support personnel. The parent engagement will be held by our Parent Coordinator Ms. Saldana and our Bilingual Coordinator, Ms. Marte. Parents will be kept in contact with the school through phone calls or letters to be sent home. We are currently using a text messaging program called "REMINDER". Parents will receive messages with up coming school events. We are also communicating with parents via email using "School Messenger". Parents will be given the opportunity to join the students on field trips during Saturday Academy. We will also promote workshops, conferences and small group meetings, in which parents and teachers will have the opportunity to report and discuss student progress, attendance and participation level. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Saldana, will serve as the main communication link between parents and teachers, and will assist in facilitating parent activities. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Community Math and Science Prep Borough Manhattan School Number 328 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Olga Quiles Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jeanette Marte Teacher/Subject Area S. Marin (Math) Teacher/Subject Area S. Ramirez (NLA) Related-Service Provider Karen Martinez Smith Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal James Cole Coach type here School Counselor Karen Martinez Smith Parent Jasmine Dones Parent Coordinator Herminia Saldana Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 228 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 117 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 51.32%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 2017-18 SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use authentic assessments such as: 1). The formative assessment that is currently taking place in our school are, created by the teachers. Teachers use the Engage NY program in order to include the formative assessment. Teachers use running records in order to track student’s growth in their reading level. The running record program we are currently using the Teacher’s College Program. • Letter Recognition: All 26 letters of the alphabet are represented, either as targets (correct answers) or distractors (incorrect answer choices). Only lowercase letters are used, as they are generally considered more challenging than uppercase letters and more appropriate for assessing older readers. • Sight Word Reading: In some items, the targets come from the ﬁrst 300 words on the Dolch and Fry word lists and the distractors are common words that look similar to the target. In other items, the targets come from the ﬁrst 5,000 words in 2018-19 CEP 58  the American Heritage Word Frequency Book—a comprehensive list of words found in grade school texts—and the distractors are misspellings of the target. • Decoding: All answer choices are non-words that follow the conventions of English. The items represent the breadth of spelling patterns taught in most phonics programs and align to the System 44 scope and sequence. Targets and distractors work together to assess individual sound-spellings and require students to attend to differences among spelling patterns. The items were carefully generated to avoid proper nouns, Spanish words, non-words that sound like real words, and items that may be difﬁcult for speakers of certain dialects, including African American Vernacular English, to distinguish phonologically. Detailed easy-to-follow examples of teacher-student interactions and instructional techniques provide insight into the following: • Instructing students in word identification • Understanding how students learn word meanings • Teaching word meanings • Teaching comprehension strategies • Developing students’ metacognition, or awareness of their thinking • Creating instructional programs for teaching comprehension strategies • Working with students whose language or culture differs from that assumed by classroom materials 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2). Formative assessments are given to the students at least every six weeks. Co-teachers assist the teacher to completing the running records. Teachers base the formative assessment on what has taken place in the current unit. Teachers use the data to place their students groups. Many times teachers will groups their students according to their reading level as well as the NYSESLAT. The data is also used to target our students and where to determine their area of struggle. Teachers also have students complete running records every 6 to 8 weeks. Use of running records determines individual students' fluency levels and then allows the teacher to create homogeneous groups for skill based instruction.This data demonstrates that our ELLs need a large amount of scaffolding and vocabulary development in order to achieve the instructional shifts set forth by the Common Core State Standards. We also noticed that our ELLs also need significant support with engaging in close reading and writing from sources. This is also a school -wide need. Since our common units address these needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 3. The Summative that are being used are the Periodic Assessment from Schoolnet as well as teacher created end of the unit Summative assessment. Many times the summative assessment consist of completing and essay or completing a project at the end of the unit. Anecdotal records that include notes about student work ethics, attitudes, energy level, engagement, and class participation. Informal assessments allow our teachers to track the ongoing progress of their students regularly and often. By using informal assessments, our teachers can target students' specific problem areas, adapt instruction, and intervene earlier rather than later. Ongoing assessments are particularly important for English language learners (ELLs). Standardized tests in English do not usually reflect ELLs' true content knowledge or abilities. Yet informal assessments can provide a more well-rounded picture of their skills, abilities, and ongoing progress. We also evaluate success of our programs for ELLs by examing NYS assessment data, and AYP results for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 4.As soon as the results as been gathered the ELA/ENL department come together and analyze the results. Teachers use the results to place students in, groups that best fits their needs. Teachers use the data to determine what standards the students 2018-19 CEP 59  are struggling within writing and reading. Teacher made tests determine student mastery of previously taught objectives. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 5.The school creates an action plan how we are going to target our students this year. For example, the ELA committee, choose to target the long term ELLs, the reason for this because many of our long term are struggling as writers. Many of our students are not meeting the writing criteria in the NYSESLAT of in the ELA state exam. As we look back on student work we notice they must follow a writing format. Rubrics specify specific criteria to be measured. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 6. CMSP 328 is currently using the ELLs data analysis to determine our students areas of struggle. As a school our students are struggling in the area of writing. The NYSESLAT is used in our school for example to determine where the students are in their writing skills. This school year we were able to recognize students were at the expanding level were at a standstill because they are struggling in writing. Teachers also use the NYSESLAT in order to determine how they would like to place their place their students in groups according to the students. The ELA exam was use to determine how ELLs are struggling in their reading comprehension skills. Students have show they struggle citing evidence from the text. We have used the ELA and ELLs periodic assessment to determine what common core standards students are struggling in and what standards we must focus on throughout the school year. As well as for the Math State Exam and Math periodic assessment are used to determine what standards we need to focus on throughout a unit.Students at the Entering, Emerging and transitional level also received their lowest test scores in writing. Our ELLs have trouble with vocabulary and sentence structure. For some students, speaking is also a challenge; some students struggle with producing appropriate vocabulary and grammatical structures, while others are still in the pre-production stage. Across the board, speaking is one of the students’ strongest skill. This hierarchy of skills, with writing being the least developed and speaking the most, is a common one for Spanish-speaking Ells. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 7). The structures that are put in place goes as follows, the content area teachers come together in analysis the periodic assessment. They determine areas students did well. Teachers will then focus on the areas of struggles and determine what standards we need to focus on. Teachers will reconstruct the upcoming unit to meet the student’s needs. Teachers focus on a new standard weekly in order to tackle the student’s area of struggle. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL Program that is currently in place in CMSP 328 are Freestanding ENL program. In the Freestanding ENL program students are pulled out of class the from all three grade levels. The students who participate in the standalone classes are entering, emerging as well as transitioning students at least 4 times a week. An ENL teachers will also integrating the content area teachers in the classroom 4 times a week in total meeting 8 times a week, which this totals into 360 minutes a week. During the freestanding ENL classes the focus is to build students speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills. ENL teacher implement what is taking place in the ELA classroom. Teachers are 2018-19 CEP 60  building students vocabulary through the use of the current unit. Students are analyzing visuals that represent their current unit. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language classes travel in heterogeneous groups. The classes consist, of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, as well as Commanding students. In grades 6 to 8, at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided; at the expanding level, the integrated ENL is with any content area that best meets the needs of the student. In our Dual Language Program students receive half of their instruction in English, and half of their instruction in Spanish/target language. Language is taught through content areas as well as through literacy. Our students spend 50% of their instructional time with a target language (Spanish) immersion teacher who uses only the target language. The language is rotated daily, for example the language of day is Spanish on (Monday) the following day the language of the day would be English. Throughout the day students are instructed in one language for the entire day. There are commanding students who continue to take classes in the Dual Language classrooms. We currently have students who are learning the Spanish in the Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minutes are delivered in each program model in compliance with Grades K-8, CR Part 154. The Bilingual Coordinator as well as the school programmer ensures each students is given the correct mandated minutes. They also use the ELL Policy and Reference guide in order to ensure students are getting the correct minutes according to their NYSESLAT exam. ENL/ELA students receive services 8 times a week. HLA students receive services 4 times a week. In there home language supports are used to enrich comprehension. This program has been designed under the New York State Guidelines: 180 minutes of ENL instruction (4 periods of 45 minutes each) for children at an advanced level of English and 360 minutes of ENL instruction (8 periods of 45 minutes of each) for children at a beginner/intermediate level of English. In fact, we offer 10 periods (45 minutes each) of ENL and ELA instruction per week for every student. We acknowledge that allowing ELLs access to content in their home language provides them with a way to construct meaning in English. Therefore, teachers strategically use their home language as a support structure for ELLs to clarify, build knowledge, extend comprehension, and bridge experiences through technology, home language materials, and flexible groupings. The percentage of class time taught in their home language steadily decreases as students develop English proficiency and the necessary literacy skills to participate fully in all-English content courses. Our free standing English as a New Language (ENL) Program offers students all instruction in English in self-contained classrooms. Within this program, language arts is taught using ENL and ELA methodologies. Content-area instruction is in English using ENL strategies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Throughout the Dual Language courses the languages are rotated. The language is rotated daily. For example, the language of the day is Spanish all content area classes are taking place in the Spanish Language. In ELA, teachers focus on implementing the literacy shifts within our common units of study across content areas and grades. Because all students engage in the same school-developed common units (for each grade and subject), all students must have access to grade-appropriate complex texts. The ELA and HLA class are aligned in school curriculum, for example our current unit is narrative in both classes are reading and writing on narrative elements. Both classes are reading different text in the classroom. At the end of unit students are assessed on the writing through writing a personal narrative.Students following the writing process, such as planning using a graphic organizer that meets their needs. Students continue to work on drafting, peer editing, and publishing their work. Our teachers build vocabulary by focusing on teaching students how to use close reading strategies to jointly and independently construct meaning. Our ELA teachers scaffold their instruction for ELLs by focusing on high-frequency academic language and words related to unit concepts, as well as limiting the number of words per lesson, 2018-19 CEP 61  providing learner-friendly definitions, and using various graphic organizers to support visual learners. Teachers work with students in small groups, in order to meet the students needs.Throughout the content areas students are working in cooperative learning groups. Throughout the math, science, social studies classes students are assesses in both English and HLA they are on their reading comprehension skills, as well as in their vocabulary. Within both our Bilingual and ENL programs, the content area teachers use a sheltered instruction approach to teaching our ELLs. Content teachers provide language support, as well as standards-based instruction, in order to build knowledge of academic language, content, and performance within our ELLs. Learning objectives are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). ENL and content area teachers have common planning time. The language objective is also aligned with daily lessons that take place in class. For our ELLs that require push-in services, the ENL teacher aligns this support with the content objectives and learning goals, and provides scaffolds to support students in learning academic language and content knowledge. ESL content area teachers co-plan with the general education content teachers to support and identify the themes and enduring understanding to prioritize when implementing the curriculum. Math, Science, and Social are taught in the students home language. Again the language that is instructed in the class goes according to the language of the day. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4). ELLs in the Dual Language program are assessed in their home language. Students are assessed through their writing. The ELA and the HLA curriculum are aligned so students must complete an end of unit summative. Students may Students must write a complete essay in their home language. Students are also assessed in reading in order to determine their reading level in their home language. M.S. 328 administers formative assessments to all students in 6-week cycles. The assessments are created in Spanish for math and science on each grade.Students are able to access their home language through the use of English/Spanish, English/French, and English/Arabic dictionaries. Students are able to use the Internet in order to locate articles in their home language. Students also work closely with their peers, which their peers may translate what is taking place in class or they may assist each other in class projects. Many times teachers use this opportunity to determine what the students considers important information or what are the skills the student is using in order to complete a task. We order the appropriate number of state tests in Spanish and other available languages. We reach out to the office of translation where necessary for languages not covered. HLA teachers also frequently assess their students on skills related to those students are studying in ELA classes, to ensure that students are staying on track with the skills for which they are cognitively, but not linguistically, ready. Assessing students' comfort with these skills in their home language ensures that they are appropriately evaluated in their native languages even more frequently. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiate instructions takes place as follows, SIFE: Students maybe given text, that students may view in both native language as well as the English Language in order for students to be expose to the vocabulary. Students are given text that is in their native language. We differentiate instruction for our SIFE students by connecting students’ prior knowledge and/or real world connections to their current learning. Our teachers use multiple entry points in their lessons, often including video clips . Teachers choose engaging topics and/or connections to enhance understanding and to further promote academic language. In addition, our teachers use purposeful groupings in order to develop students’ critical thinking and collaboration skills. These students receive the mandated 360 minutes as per CR Part 154.2. Newcomer: Students are exposed to low-level text. Students work in small groups. Students are exposed to vocabulary that consist of everyday objects to build their vocabulary skills. When students are writing they are given sentence starters. Students are exposed to realia picture in order to have discussions about the pictures and to build their vocabulary. For our newcomers and developing students, English language development is supported through scaffolding and differentiation strategies as teachers engage newcomers in our units of study. For example, during a reading lesson students are pre-taught words or phrases prior to reading a text. Students are given evidence-based graphic organizers to identify one or more 2018-19 CEP 62  differences between facts. During a writing students are given sentence starters. Students are also receive a word bank in order to complete the sentences. We also conduct intensive training of English language skills that includes the four areas of development: understanding & listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. Intensive English language skills development occurs during individual and small group work. Developing: Students at the developing continue to work on building their vocabulary. Students are building up their writing skills as well as their listen skills in the English language. Students are focusing on building their reading comprehension skills. During a reading activity students may receive a graphic organizer to organize sentences from a text in order to determine how to cite evidence from the text. During a writing activity student will receive a word bank in order to write complete sentences. Students are to write a short essay at least two paragraphs long. Students are also receiving transitional words. Long Term: The focus with Long Term ELLs is to working their writing and reading comprehension skills. Students focus writing a complete essay and focus on the organizing a well-written essay. Students continue to use graphic organizers, sentence starters, and use of a checklist in order to keep track or their writing process. Students are building on their writing skills. For our long-term ELLs, we provide them with many opportunities to use the language they are learning by actively engaging in collaborative, interactive, performance-based classroom activities. Teachers also build language into the content areas by having the students continuously write in their journals, reading logs, use manipulatives, make content-specific word walls with illustrations and create class-made dictionaries with content-specific vocabulary. These students also attend after school and Saturday academy. Former ELLs: With former ELLs we want to maintain their English language skills. Continue to build their reading and writing skills. They are exposed reading text at their grade level and are writing an essay. Students are also analyzing the text. For our former ELLs, teacher collaboration with the ENL teacher is key. Differentiation of Instruction includes purposeful groupings, use of video clips and realia to build background knowledge and provide context, and regular AIS instruction to provide one-on-one or small group support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies that take place in the classroom are cooperative learning. Students work in heterogeneous groups. Students have discussion in groups and create hands-on projects, which are presented in class this allows students to learn from one another in class. Students are also given materials such as text from Engage NY at their grade level. Ell-SWDs are served by an Individualized Education Program (IEP). An IEP team determines a student’s eligibility for special education services and the language in which special education programs and services are delivered. ELLs who are also students with disabilities (SWD) receive accommodations that apply both to ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. ELLs with disabilities are not exempted from the NYSESLAT, and may use the test modifications and accommodations as detailed on their IEP when taking the NYSESLAT. ELL status cannot be the determinant factor for special education eligibility. Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches should be applied to ELL students who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a reasonable time period. ELLs with disabilities must receive the required level of ELL services, although program placement and parental option procedures may be different for special education programs and services, and are facilitated by the Committee for Special Education during IEP meetings. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers have small groups embedded in to their daily schedule. Teachers work with their struggling students as well as ENL and IEP students. The groups normally consist of six students. We enable ELL-SWD to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by offering ICT (Integrated Co Teaching) classes in each grade. According to students results of the NYSESLAT students will receive ENL services. The ENL teachers are integrate into the ELA classes four times a week. By providing students with the instructional program recommended within their IEPs, students are ensured instruction in the least restrictive environment that also supports their English language development. ICT classes follow the same common units as all general education, ENL and Bilingual classes. 2018-19 CEP 63  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8). Our targeted intervention program for the following … ELA: program is to work closely with the long term ELLs on their writing skills. Many of our long term ELLs are not meeting the criteria as Commanding student due to their writing skills. In order to create class discussion students work in cooperative learning groups. Students present in class their discussion in front of their classmates Math: Teachers place students in heterogeneous groups. Students solved problems in groups and presented it to their classmates. The math teachers targeted the new comers. They focused on building students vocabulary to use the correct terminology. Students were also able to work closely with their teachers during after-school and Saturday academy. Social Studies: The intervention program for S.S. targets all levels of ELLs and placing them in groups. Students were exposed to text with many visuals in order to understand the text. Students were able to analyze different artifacts and have open discussion about the artifacts. Students also have discussion using the Socratic Seminar in order to understand the text of a unit. Expose students to vocabulary prior to reading a text. Expose students to primary and secondary resources. Science: Teachers targeted group are new comers and transitional students. Teachers choose to target this group of students because we need to continue to build their vocabulary. Students work in heterogeneous groups. The teachers expose student to many visuals and many hands on activities. Students are given many texts in both their native and English language. Many of our students are English Language Learners or former English Language Learners. It is our priority to ensure that the needs of our population are met. Our Ells have access to all the instructional and extracurricular programs at our school. We use our Title III- Targeted intervention funding to provide additional support outside of the mandated services. English instruction is provided from Wednesday through Thursday from 2:30 pm until 4:00 pm. On Saturdays we provide additional support in mathematics from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ELLs identified by their scores on state ELA and Math exams as needing or benefiting from additional support are grouped to work with their current after-school content teachers for intervention. The focus in the ELA after-school intervention are reading comprehension strategies and writing development. Students also receive Math intervention during the after-school intervention program by a current math teacher in small groups of students. Newly arrived bilingual students with deficiencies in Spanish (or who are identified as SIFE) receive intervention during "after-school" with the NLA teacher. An ELL after-school program is also offered for additional support in reading, and math. All of the materials used during the instructional day, AIS and after school are all based on needs of each student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on our data ENL students have been offered the After School program and Saturday Academy. Students of all levels may work closely with the ENL teacher. Students are also able to work with their math and science teachers as well. The following school year we would like to open SIFE program in order to support them in their home language. Would like to open Saturday Academy for SIFE students as well in the the 2017-2018 school year. Lastly, we would like to create an ENL program during Saturday Academy where students are able to work in homogeneous groups. The improvement we look forward to making is to improve our ENL students writing. We are encouraging expanding students to attend both After school and Saturday Academy. This way we are able to target the ENL students and truly meet their needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We had a Transitional Bilingual Program last school year (2015 – 2016). As we study our data we realized that students we not making much progress. Administration and teachers agreed to use the Dual Language program instead. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 64  ENL students are given many opportunities in this school. Students are offered the after-school program as well as Saturday Academy. For example, during the after-school program students are given ENL services as well as math services. Students are given the opportunity the join the dance club, sports, girls and boys club. Students also attend field trips to baseball games, Broadway plays, and to the museum. There is also a parent training that takes place once a month. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that are currently being used for ENL students during technology students are using Reading Plus, and Front Row (Reading & Math). The Freestanding program is currently using Inside by National Geographic in order to work with students in small homogeneous groups. Students are using Engage NY as well. All our classrooms are equipped with smart boards. Students have access to a computer lab. All teachers are encouraged to incorporate technology into their instruction to support comprehension, differentiation for student modality strengths, and to build student's exposure and skill set in preparation for 21st century learning and workplace. Most teachers use computer projectors in the classroom to present part or all of their lessons. Students in both bilingual and ESL homerooms use the school's computer lab or Macbook carts to learn and produce artifacts using a variety of Microsoft Office programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Student’s home language is supported in the Dual Language Program in the HLA classes as well as in other content areas. Students receive rigorous instruction in their home language. Students are assessed in oral, reading, written language. Students participate in class presenting in class project in their native language. During ENL students may work with a partner who speak the same language. Students analyze pictures and create narratives based on the pictures. Students will analyze the pictures in their native language. Home language support is delivered as follows: In freestanding ENL, language development and content instruction are supported in the native language in order to enrich comprehension. In Dual Language, students receive instruction in both languages. (50/50) 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures students are receiving the service, the bilingual coordinator (Ms. Marte) ensures students are receiving their services. The bilingual coordinator ensure students are receiving their mandates minutes and assist the programmer with placing the students with teachers that may fulfill the students needs. The bilingual coordinator assesses students in order to measure their English language level. The ENL teacher co-teaches with ELA teachers in order to make sure students receive their services. Teachers meet once a week to discuss weekly planning to reinforce the ELA teacher. Teachers also use appropriate text according students grade level and age. In both our Bilingual and ENL programs, ELLs engage in the same grade and content-level appropriate common units of study as their English speaking peers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? CMSP328 does not share a building with a school as this time.All our classrooms are equipped with smart boards. Students have access to a computer lab. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parents and the students are given a tour of the school. The parent coordinator of our school (Ms. Saldana) creates an orientation two days prior to the first of school. Parents receive training, on how to stay involved in their child’s education and who to communicate with. Parents are given training on Skedula. The parent coordinator goes over the code of conduct with the parents. The dean of the school goes over the code of conduct. The parent coordinator informs parents regarding the after school, and Saturday Academy. Parents are also given information regarding immigration and where they may receive help. Lastly, students are given a tour of the school. Students are then paired with a buddy to ease the transition. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, assistant principal, and principal participate in all activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 CEP 65  The only language elective offered at MS 328 at this time is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? A). The dual language program we are currently following is the side-by-side model. Students are exposed to both English and Spanish. The language is rotated daily. The language of the day is posted outside the Dual Language classroom. Poster are posted in the classroom translated and are placed side-by-side of one another.The program also helps students to succeed in academic subjects. The program emphasizes the development of full bilingualism. Instructional Goals: To meet academic achievement standards for grade promotion and to become bilingual and bi-literate. B). The core content areas are taught in both English and Spanish. The language is rotated daily. Program Components: Students receive Reading and Writing in English. Reading and writing in their native language. Specialized instruction in ENL. Social Studies is in English and native language. Mathematics in English and native language. Science is in English and native language. C). The languages are rotated daily. For example, the language of the day on Monday is Spanish, and Tuesday the language of the day would be English. Students may read text and view the text side-by-side in both languages. D). The language is not taught at the same time. The languages are rotated daily. All students receive at least eight periods of Dual Language instruction in the target language in each grade. English Proficient Students and ELLs are integrated during the entire instructional day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1). The professional developments are offered to ENL and Bilingual teachers. The PDs are meant to support the students to build their speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. Teachers attend a PD on Socratic Seminar in order to enforce discussion in class about text that is being read in class. Teachers are also offered PDs to build students vocabulary as well as their writing skills. ENL teachers have also attended a PD in order to understand the ENL standards and how it should be embedded in their lesson plans. Teachers are given a PD on LDC in order to create modules that meet the standards. Middle School 328 provides ESL strategies professional development sessions to the entire faculty during our Summer Institute, Professional Development days, Faculty Conferences, weekly grade and subject area meetings. Professional Development Plan: Focuses on an action plan on how to meet the needs of the general education, ELLs, and SWD. Teachers also create a curriculum to ensure what is taking place in each unit. Technology Training: Teachers of CMSP 328 receive training for CS4ALL. Teachers will implement technology in their class. Teachers are trained to use the computer program CODE and Scratch. The training will include: how to use technology for 2018-19 CEP 66  individualized instruction and assessment and how to use reports for intervention and program monitoring; how to use curriculum content to address specific state standards. MS 328 Data: Teachers are given a PDs on understanding school data. For example, teachers are given a PD on school data and create an action plan. The professional development opportunities listed above encompass some of the offerings for teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as the engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. All professional development opportunities are grounded in the Danielson system, which effectively prepares students for the Common Core Learning Standards' level of rigor. The Questioning and Discussion, academic vocabulary, Close Reading techniques, independence, and using assessment in instruction professional development opportunities will be offered all year, helping teachers support ELLs in deeper and deeper ways. Monthly PD Topic to be presented goes as follows: October- Workshop model and how to group your ELLs. November- ENL Progression, January- Writing for ENL students,February- Reading Comprehension & Vocabulary building for ENL students, March- Understanding Math for ENL students, April- NYSESLAT, and May-SIFE. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers are usually sent out of the building to PDs to become familiar on meeting the ENL students needs. Our goal is to send teachers out monthly and turnkey the PD as well. The records that teachers have attended the PDs are kept in a binder along with the agenda. Teachers sign the names on a spreadsheet in order to keep track of their attendance. The guidance counselor attends a professional development annually in facilitating the transition of our students moving from middle to high school at the borough field support center. MS 328follows the mandate of providing school-wide professional development workshops per academic year. Also, teachers have weekly common planning time embedded in their programs. Topics include scaffolding ESL methodologies into instruction, shared understanding of what are access points for ELLs, checks for understanding to enable grouping of students, Deepen student interactions and discussions so that students take ownership of their learning, Use of exemplars across grades and across curriculum's, more reading and writing incorporated into every lesson and creating a print-rich, literate learning environment for the ELLs. Records of these meetings are in the form of minutes. Our school has a mandated template that captures teachers’ discussions, professional development, and work in these teams. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1). CMSP328 provide annual meeting with parent on (parent engagement), which is held on Tuesdays. Teachers reach out to the parents and have meeting with the parents regarding their child’s progress. Teachers mention to the parents then goals they have in place for their child. As for the parents who are unable to attend phone calls are made by teachers and the bilingual coordinator will reach out to the parents by making phone calls. Our parents’ needs are addressed through the monthly meetings with our Parent Coordinator. Our Parent Coordinator facilitates two-way communication with parents and coordinates activities among the staff, School Leadership Team, and Parents’ Association. The Parent Coordinator is also involved in the initial orientation sessions, as well as focus groups and training workshops for parents. Our Parent Coordinator speaks Spanish, as do most our parents, and is available during school hours and via telephone during after school hours. Teachers also use their parent engagement time on Tuesdays to communicate with Ell parents on their child's progress.We also offer parents conference calls with teachers present. Many or our meeting logged in a parent contact binder and many times teachers post the out comes to the meetings on Skedula. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2). There is many parent involvement activities that take place in our school. Parents are given an update of their child’s progress. Parents are invited to school events such as painting with the art teacher and your child night. The parent coordinator has jewelry and make-up classes for the parents. Parents are also offered English classes weeknights. The parents of our ELLs are strongly represented at our workshops and at school events. They are usually very responsive to teachers and they seek to proactively address issues with the students. We work very close with our bi-lingual parent coodinator to ensure that our parents are aware of the services in their community. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all meetings and initiatives of the Parent/Teacher Association and are represented on the School Leadership Team. Parents of ELL students also participate in multiple workshops provided by the ELL team (for example during open school night and selection of high schools). Our parent coordinator facilitates parent and student Weekend trips to the Bronx Zoo, Aquarium, Botanical Gardens, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Olga Quiles, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Community Math & Science Prep School DBN: 06M328 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Olga Quiles James Cole Title Principal Assistant Principal Herminia Saldana Parent Coordinator Jeanette Marte ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jasmine Dones Parent Ana Castillo Matos Teacher/Subject Area Ashley Guilamo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach K. Martinez School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M328 School Name: Middle School 328 Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Over 75% of our parents have identified Spanish as their primary language. This has indicated to us that every written notice must be in both English and Spanish and that every meeting requires spanish translation. During registration, non-English speaking parents are provided with a home identification language in their native language. We document the languages that are present in our school and work with the DOE translated using the DOE Translation & Interpretation Unit as needed. The unit is used for translation of assessments analysis and progress reports. Continued collection of data informs the school of those parents/guardians who are in needs of written translation and oral interpretation. Based on information from the home language survey, information regarding the language the parent speaks and writes is entered into ATS. Our school secretary reviews the data on a regular basis to check on missing or incorrect information in ATS. 2018-19 CEP 71  Information regarding parent language abilities are located in ATS. Our secretary regularly runs a report in ATS which indicates missing information. She is then able to follow up if the parent language is not listed in ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language A review of the home language surveys indicate that the majority of parents speak and read Spanish which mandates that all letters are sent home in English and Spanish. Many staff members speak both English and Spanish which is the major language in the school’s community. Communication between school and the community is always in both languages, Spanish and English. All public meetings and parent association meetings are conducted in both languages. In the event we might have speakers of other languages i.e. Arabic, French, Haitian Creole, etc., we will contact the Office of Translation Services to help us. The Interpretation and Translation Unit will be contacted if we need a speaker of American Sign Language. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents and correspondence to parents such as announcement letters, trips, after-school programs and activities, NYS Testing dates,school closings, Open Houses, Parent-Teacher Conference notices, etc. are all disseminated in English and Spanish. , 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 1.During registration, parents or guardians of new arrivals. 2. Parent-Teacher Conferences 3. Open Houses 4. Curriculum Nights 5. Parent Outreach Tuesdays afterschool. 6. Workshops 7. School Tours 8. Attendance Teacher follow-up 9. 8 th Grade High School Selection Process with Guidance Counselor 10. Dean follow-up regarding discipline and behavior 2018-19 CEP 73  11. ANY documents containing critical information regarding a student’s education. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The T & I Unit distributes multilingual posters to all DOE public schools at the beginning of each school year. Schools are required to post these posters in a highly visible location. MS328 will post this information in the main office. These posters provide LEP parents instruction on where and how to obtain interpretation services. The Unit also makes available, on its website, additional multilingual signage (including directional signs) that schools and offices can download, print and post. FACE conducts spot checks on schools throughout the year to ensure that appropriate translated signs are visible to parents who visit the school. The DOE makes available to parents the Parents’ Bill of Rights and A Parent’s Guide to Special Education in the covered languages. Both documents make parents aware of their rights to languages services. These documents are distributed to parents at the beginning of each school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather information from parents through: School Survey for Parents SLT 2018-19 CEP 74  Parents' Association 2018-19 CEP 75 
