2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M333 School Name: P.S. 333 MANHATTAN SCHOOL FOR CHILDREN Principal: CLAIRE LOWENSTEIN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Manhattan School for Children 03M333 31030010333 K-8 School Number (DBN): 154 West 93 rd Street, New York, NY 10025 212-222-1450 212-222-1828 Phone Number: Fax: Claire Lowenstein CLowenstein@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Claire Lowenstein Raphael Tomkin Jason Isbell ShawnChin-Chance N/A N/A N/A District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street, New York City, NY 10025 LAltsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-678-2804 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: 212-356-7537 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Claire Lowenstein Raphael Tomkin Jason Isbell Shawn Chin-Chance Kate Liebman Kathryn Good *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ruby Dawson Karen Dunner Hilary Kaden Michelle Stagnitta Alice Hsu Parent UFT/Teacher Member UFT/Teacher Member UFT/Teacher Member UFT/Teacher Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to be a caring community of lifelong learners, with collaborative teaching in a workshop model where students are doing most of the talking and heavy lifting of their learning. Teachers are facilitators and coaches. Inclusion is intentional and we want to de-standardize curriculum to allow access for all learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 333, Manhattan School for Children (MSC), was founded in the early 1990s through the cooperative effort of parents, teachers and staff members of New York City’s Community School District 3. It is a school of choice, open to children who are zoned for District 3. Since that time, MSC’s educators and families have worked to build and maintain a school community in which students of different racial/ethnic, socio-economic as well as physical and academic abilities come together to celebrate multiple ways of knowing the world and each other. In order to support our philosophy and fulfill our mission, we have partnered with the following organizations: ● Teachers College Reading and Writing Project ● Teachers college Inclusion Project ● New York City Ballet ● Wellness in the Schools ● Google Classroom ● Lincoln Center Institute ● NY Sun Works ● Urban Advantage ● Roads to Success ● New Victory Theatre ● Harmonize Kidz  The Leadership Program  Computer Science for All (CS4ALL) This year we are again committing to Responsive Classroom as a school wide initiative. Responsive Classroom is a research- and evidence-based approach to education that is associated with greater teacher effectiveness, higher student achievement, and improved school climate. K-6 classes start each day with Morning Meeting, a daily gathering that helps children build community, practice academic and social skills, and warm up for a day of engaged learning. Three days a week, 7th and 8th graders participate in Advisory meetings that allow for students to connect to the teacher, our school, and to each other. We believe that all children are gifted in multiple ways, and we organize the curriculum thematically using an open-ended, inter-disciplinary, project-based approach that allows students to demonstrate their talents while learning from each other. In this way, we respond to each child’s unique developmental needs while encouraging a meaningful learning process. Manhattan School for Children is deeply committed to creating an inclusive environment. We believe: ● Children learn by doing 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Children learn at different rates, using different strengths and different learning styles ● Children learn about the world in an integrated way ● Children learn when they feel good about themselves ● Children learn when their parents are active participants in their school education 2017-2018 was a year of reflection for Manhattan School for Children. We revisited the school’s mission and this year we are continuing our efforts to strengthen our inclusion model. Our work will be supported through our partnership with Teachers College Inclusion Project. This includes coaching, technology integration, strengthening seamless inclusion models, opening classroom doors in classes and administrative offices to promote adults learning along side students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The ICT (Integrated Collaborative Teaching) Program was created to include children with severe motor challenges into a general education setting. Each grade has one ICT class. Students in the ICT classrooms follow on-grade curriculum, with accommodations to help them meet standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made gains in many areas of the Framework this year. Our greatest progress this year was in the element of Rigorous Instruction. As evidenced by the 6% increase (from 70-76%) in the overall proficiency in ELA and a 2% increase in Math (from 64-66%) for grades 3-8. Our subgroups continued to make gains with a 2% increase among SWD (64-66%) in ELA. This was further confirmed by our 2018 Quality Review which showed a Well Developed in the area of Rigorous Instruction. Our key area of focus is to support teachers in creating access points for all learners. This includes using assessment data to inform targeted instruction as well as expanding cultural awareness in the school community. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M333 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 753 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 29 21 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 18.0% % Attendance Rate 16.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 17.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 59.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.64 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 76.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 94 93 12 94.3% 0.7% 18.6% 11.4% 6.0% 5.7% 2 8% 4.8 65.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Manhattan School for Children’s math scores improved by 3.8% this year with the overall proficiency rate in June 2018 of 65.8% as compared to 62% the previous year. Our subgroups continue to make gains with a 2% increase with Latinos and a 6% increase for Economically Disadvantaged students. While we are proud that student achievement in Math has been increasing incrementally over the last four years (53%-65.8%), we believe these numbers should be higher. We attribute these small increments to the work towards curricula coherence. K-5 teachers will continue to use the CCLS aligned Engage NY curriculum and grades 6 and 7 will continue with CMP3. This year all 8th graders will take Algebra 1 Regents course in preparation for high school coursework. Through our assessment work this year, we have identified that our students have a wide spectrum in competency in number sense and fluency. Our goal is targeted towards strengthening students' number fluency with differentiated math centers. Math fluency growth is measured by a student's movement through various stages as illustrated in the Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics (ECAM) and the Skills Based Screeners from K-5 Math Teacher Resources assessment materials. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will use assessment data to inform instruction on a daily basis.  By June 2019, 85% of 3rd grade students and 5th grade students will increase their math fluency and number sense by at least one stage within each strand as measured by the Computational Fluency Screeners (3-5). 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will be supported with structured math planning time twice a month to monitor progress and prepare assessment materials. Teachers will input ECAM and Screener assessment data three times a year. Teachers will participate in a cycle of inter-visitation of ECAM centers/Skills-based Centers both in school and off site. Assessment data will be tracked and analyzed by grade teams with SETSS, AIS and or RTI team to identify trends and plan for student intervention. K-5 teachers will be provided with coaching on ECAM centers (K-2) and skills based centers (3-5). Coaching will be provided by K-5 Math Teacher Resources; an outside math consulting firm. Student groups and activities will be data driven. Sept-June 2018-19 Administration K-5 Teachers K-5 Teachers Sept-June Administration 2018-19 K-5 Teachers K-5 Teachers Sept-June Administration 2018-19 K-5 Math teachers Sept-June 2018-19 K-5 Teachers Administration K-5 Math Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited to Curriculum Night in September where the teachers will review curriculum goals for the year. Teachers will also host a family workshop in January designed to inform and enrich the math curriculum at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. K-5 Math consultants, meeting time for Response to Intervention Team, Monday afternoon professional learning times for the math PL and curriculum planning, substitutes for inter-visitation coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of 3rd and 5th grade students will have moved at least one stage of the Addition and Subtraction strand and Multiplication strand as measured by the January math Screener data collection. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Computational Fluency Screeners by K-5 Math Teacher Resources. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our community is composed of students of different racial/ethnic, socio-economic as well as physical and academic abilities. We must respond to each child’s developmental needs while encouraging a meaningful learning process. While we strive to do this for our students, parents and teachers have expressed some concerns about the culture and discipline of the school. As a result, in 2018-2019 our efforts will focus on the following: ● 100% of teachers will participate in Responsive Classroom training ● About 50% of parents will participate in trainings or Responsive Classroom activities in the classroom *Training can be free if offered by PA or SLT ● 100% of students will participate in Responsive Classroom practices ● Grade delegates meet on schedule and will continue to do.  All 03M333 students, all 03M333 parents/legal guardians, all 03M333 staff-members, and all 03M333 school administrators will receive all relevant training and all relevant materials from 03M333's "Respect for All (RFA)" Liaison, as per NYC DOE Chancellor's Regulation A-832, by October 31st, 2018.   As per NYC DOE Chancellor's Regulation A-832, all 03M333 students, all 03M333 parents/legal guardians, all 03M333 staff-members, and all 03M333 school administrators will follow, with fidelity, the procedure for the filing, investigation, and resolution of complaints of student-to-student bias-based harassment, intimidation, and/or bullying. Based on our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, we achieved 43% positive responses in Social Emotional Learning. According to the school survey, the area that we will be focusing on is Classroom Behavior (54%). There was a drop of 11 percentage points from 2016-2017 school year to the 2017-18 school year on Classroom Behavior (54% to 43%.) This year, students in grades 6-8 will continue to present their academic progress in student led showcases each marking period Additionally, the spring family conferences will all be student-led for K-8 students. Students are supported to speak about their academic progress with rubrics, presentation prep and Advisory groups. K-5 students are supported through various scaffolds such as videos, rubrics and rehearsals. Our approach to building school culture, discipline, and social-emotional support is informed by Responsive Classroom, which promotes a safe environment and inclusive culture. 2018-19 CEP 16  In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue a school-wide implementation of Responsive Classroom practices including; Morning Meeting, advisory, 3R's of Teacher Language, etc. Community building in classrooms and across the school environment will be measured by classroom observations (Danielson Domain 2) and full participation in Responsive Classroom School Wide Congress/Town Hall Meetings. The 2018 school survey revealed that only 48% of students and 32% of teachers did not feel that discipline was applied fairly at the school. In the 2018-2019 school year, K-3 teachers will be trained in a program called Emotionally Responsive Practice through our partnership with Bank Street. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students and staff will report a 10% increase in discipline being applied fairly as measured by the school survey. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Pedagogical staff will meet and plan with facilitators from The Leadership Program to implement the Empowering Upstanders curriculum, which should be completely aligned to all sections of NYC DOE Chancellor's Regulation A-832. Students and faculty in all grades will participate in School Wide Congress and Town Hall Meetings, which will convene throughout the year. Student Government and grade delegates will work with staff and administrators to build school identity, reinforce commitment to the Empowering Upstanders program, which should be completely aligned to all sections of NYC DOE Chancellor's Regulation A-832. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All school staff Sept 2018-Greg Shamie 19-May Students, teachers and administrators Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Teachers, Claire Lowenstein Professional Learning Committee will collaboratively design specific workshops with our Inclusive and Diversity Committee four times a year. Teachers will have participated in four Integrate NYC workshops on Restorative v. Punitive punishment. All pedagogical staff Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Teachers, Administrators and Inclusive & Diversity Committee, Integrate NYC Advisory groups in grades 6-8 will support social emotional learning through the use of The Responsive Advisory Meeting Book to guide weekly meetings. K-8 Teachers Sept 2018-Claire Lowenstein 19 -June 2018-19 Morning Meeting will be implemented at the start of the school day in 100% of K-6 classrooms. The Morning Meeting will include structures for community building and collaborative learning as well as the creation and ongoing revision of students’ Academic and Social Hopes and Dreams (Goals and Declarations). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 18  Families will be invited to participate in Inclusive and Diversity Committee bi-monthly meetings and three programs a year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnership with The Leadership Project, parent-coordinator; Advisory time; Morning Meeting time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, There will be a 10% increase as measured by the internal school survey of teachers and parents about discipline being applied fairly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. school-created survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Manhattan School for Children is passionate about maintaining a caring community of lifelong learners. Last year's school survey revealed that 48% of students and 32% of teachers did not feel that discipline was applied fairly at the school. 54% of Teachers said that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom as reported on the 2018 School Survey. In May 2018, teachers engaged in collaborative discussions addressing the discrepancy in behavioral expectations around the school. This revealed a need for more coherence of behavioral expectations. Teachers collaboratively designed a behavioral matrix called "The Caring Community Model." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MSC staff will collaboratively implement the "K-8 Caring Community Model" to set high behavioral expectations for school culture. This will be measured by a .5 increase in the overall score for Collaborative Teachers on the School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will participate in planning meetings to introduce the model and embed it into the morning meetings, 6-8 content classes, advisory and all cluster classrooms. K-8 Teachers Sept 2018-19 -June 2018-19 Kerry Powers and Modesta Peralta Professional Learning Committee will design a staff survey to gain feedback on the implementation of the Caring Community Model K-8 Teachers Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Professional Learning Committee Students will self-assess behavioral expectations (Caring Community Model) twice a year. The "K-8 Caring Community Model" will be introduced at curriculum night, as well as re-introduced at the afternoon and evening parent-teacher conferences for K-8 students and families. The model will be displayed publicly throughout the school (i.e. classrooms, hallways, offices, etc.). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, teachers Teachers, Parents Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 K-8 teachers; Kerry Powers & Modesta Peralta K-8 Teachers, Malaka Banks and families How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Chat with Claire, Weekly Principal Letters, Curriculum Night, Family conferences, Family Handbook and website Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders, teacher team planning time, inter-visitation at the Computer School Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of MSC faculty will agree that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom as measured by a PL committee survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created staff survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We as a school community are moving towards a more inclusive, distributive leadership model. Professional development, workshops and meetings have more ongoing staff input to reflect their needs and the needs of their students. We are continuing to strengthen our transparency of school goals and policies for families and staff. According to the 2018 school survey, the overall score for Effective School Leadership was 2.64. One area of concern was that 31% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal communicates a clear vision for their school. This shows a need for improved communication between administration and staff. Additionally, 44% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. Our priority goal this year is targeted toward moving the lowest third population in reading and math. We have created a school-wide data spreadsheet to track student progress to assist all stakeholders in working toward this goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers and SETSS/AIS teachers will input TCRWP Running Record data into MSC's spreadsheet four times a year. K-8 Classroom Teachers, AIS, SETSS Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Administration and all pedagogical staff on a rotational basis Classroom teachers will assess and record data for math fluency three times a year. K-5 math teachers Administration will meet with grade teams to review and analyze the data two times a year. Staff and administration Parent workshops will be conducted on understanding students' reading and math levels facilitated by our teacher leaders. K-5 families Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Sept 2018-19-June2018-19 Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Kerry Powers CLaire Lowenstein, Kerry Powers and Modesta Peralta Kerry Powers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly letters to families from principal, Monthly "Chats with Claire" Meetings, Parent Workshops, videos shared on our website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  80 minute professional work time, Professional Learning committee meeting time, community liaison to update the website regularly Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, school leaders will meet with teachers once to review grade data and identify students who have made less than 5% growth on the data tracker. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data tracking spreadsheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MSC fosters parent involvement in the following ways: ●Parents are given access to the school at drop-off their children every morning in the classroom easing the transition into school, as well as providing access to teachers and fostering parent interaction. ●Parents are again given access to the school, to interact with teachers and fellow parents at school pick-up. ●Parents participate in 3 formal parent-teacher conferences throughout the year, 1 of which is a student-led conference. . ●Parents have the opportunity to participate at a monthly PTA meeting, a total of 10 meetings per year, hosted, alternately in the mornings as well as in the evenings. ●Parents have the opportunity to meet as a group with the Principal during the “Chats with Claire” that are offered on a monthly bases, a total of 10 a year, hosted alternately in the mornings as well as in the evenings. ●Parents are invited to at least one community event per month, such as Relatives and Special Friends Day, Movie Night, Broadway Loves MSC Night, the Science Fair, Welcome to MSC Event, the Inclusiveness and Diversity Movie Screening, the Spring Musical, Celebrate MSC Event, classroom-picnics, as well as family breakfasts in the classroom celebrating students achievement through publishing parties or project showcase day on the upper levels. ●Parents volunteer at recess time and can sign as chaperones on all class-field trips. ●Parents can serve as Class Parents, Book Room Parents, volunteer with the Parents Association, and Green Parents and can also be part of the Welcome Committee. ●Parents attend SLT-sponsored day and evening Curriculum Workshops covering a variety of subject areas and topics based on interest expressed in Parent Survey. While we have an active parent community, we endeavor to increase family attendance at many events across the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 26  By June 2019, MSC's families will report that the school's administration works hard to build trusting relationships with families as measured by a 5% increase on the school survey in the area of Parent-Principal Trust. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent coordinator will work with our Inclusion and Diversity Committee to host two workshops. Parents Guidance counselor will work with parent coordinator and class parents to host workshops on Caring Community Model (behavior expectations across school). Parents MSC website will be updated regularly to maintain daily communication on classroom events and school-wide community events. School community Professional Learning Committee will meet with the Inclusion and Diversity Committee to plan staff and parent workshops that address bias and discipline. Parents and staff Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Sept 2018-19-Feb 2018-19 Sept 2018-19-June 2018-19 Inclusion and Diversity Committee, Malaka Banks Malaka Banks, Community associate parent coordinator, teachers, administration January 2018-19-June 2018-19 Malaka Banks, Teachers Leaders, Claire Lowenstein, Integrate NYC 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher team Planning time, Parent Coordinator, School Community Associate, funding for Integrate NYC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of MSC families will report positively that the school's administration works hard to build trusting relationships with families as measured by the PA mid-year survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PA mid-year survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher referral, . Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tier I Intervention: Universal Intervention: Students performing in school’s lowest third are referred to Literacy Workshop and literacy blocks to promote differentiated instruction in all Tier I Intervention: mini-lesson; guided practice; conferring, strategy groups; guided reading; partner and small group work; book clubs; word sorts and word study (Cunningham, Bears-Words Their Way). When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier I Intervention: During the school day during Tiers II & III Interventions: During the school day, push-in and pull-out sessions with specialists Tiers II & III Interventions: Individualized and Intensive Interventions: Students are referred to Effectiveness of Tier I intervention is determined through conferring, running records and writing assessments against developmental rubrics. Students who do not appear to benefit from Tier I are referred for Tier II intervention. Tiers II & III Interventions: o Reading Rescue 1:1 tutoring grade 1 with a trained teacher or paraprofessional, 3 times a week. 2018-19 CEP 30  Mathematics Teacher referral, . o Small group instruction (Guided Reading and Writing) with classroom and literacy intervention teachers, special education teachers, and trained America Reads tutors, student teachers and paraprofessionals. At-risk support with Special Education teachers, using Wilson or Tier I Intervention : Math congress; guided practice; partner and small group work; Gallery Walk; conferring; math vocabulary and math tool kit. Effectiveness of Tier I intervention is determined through conferring, and assessments of math proofs against developmental rubrics and Practice Standards. Students who do not appear to benefit from Tier I are referred for Tier II intervention. Tier II & III Interventions: Small group instruction and at-risk support with Special Education teachers. Tier I Intervention: Universal Intervention: Students performing in school’s lowest third are referred to Mathematics Workshop to promote differentiated instruction in all Mathematics classes. Tiers II & III Interventions: Individualized and Intensive Interventions: Students are referred to Tier I Intervention: During the school day during Mathematics workshop. Tiers II & III Interventions: During the school day, push-in and pull-out sessions with specialists. 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Teacher referral, . Tier I Intervention: Universal Intervention: Students performing in school’s lowest third are referred to Social Studies periods and Tier I Intervention: mini-lesson; guided practice; conferring, strategy groups; guided reading; partner and small group work; book clubs; Academic Vocabulary study. Tiers II & III Interventions: Individualized and Intensive Interventions: Students are referred to Social Studies Teacher referral, . Tier I Intervention: Universal Intervention: Students performing in school’s lowest third are referred to Effectiveness of Tier I intervention is determined through conferring, running records and non-fiction writing assessments against developmental rubrics. Students who do not appear to benefit from Tier I are referred for Tier II intervention. Tiers II & III Interventions: Small group instruction (Guided Reading and Writing) with classroom, content area and literacy intervention teachers, language and special education teachers, and trained America Reads tutors, focused building strategies and organizational skills in non-fiction reading and writing. Tier I Intervention: mini-lesson; guided practice; conferring, strategy groups; guided reading; partner and small Tier I Intervention: During the school day during Science periods and Tiers II & III Interventions: During the school day Science periods and Tier I Intervention: During the school day focus on Non-Fiction Reading and Writing. 2018-19 CEP 32  Social Studies periods and group work; book clubs; Academic Vocabulary study. Tiers II & III Interventions: Individualized and Intensive Interventions: Students are referred to Teacher referral, . At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are referred to Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist and Social Worker ; in-class, small group and/or 1:1 interventions with one of these specialists are put in place. Effectiveness of Tier I intervention is determined through conferring, running records and non-fiction writing assessments against developmental rubrics. Students who do not appear to benefit from Tier I are referred for Tier II intervention. Tiers II & III Interventions: Small group instruction (Guided Reading and Writing) with classroom, content area and literacy intervention teachers, language and special education teachers, and trained America Reads tutors, focused building strategies and organizational skills in non-fiction reading and writing. Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist and Social Worker: provide services to students based on their needs and the needs of the school: Individual, Group and Family Counseling, Crisis Intervention and support and consultation to Tiers II & III Interventions: During the school day during Social Studies periods and During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 33  school staff on developing strategies for working with at-risk students, on an as needed basis. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We've spent it the same as last year with a portion going towards teacher salary, parent engagement, teacher per session and the rest to supplies. Funds are used to give students who are academically at-risk the same opportunity to receive an equitable and high-quality educational and to close educational achievement gaps. Some of our funds are used to support parent and family engagement activities and programs. (This is where teacher per session comes in, teachers use these funds to stay late or come in early to meet with families and also to give students time to come in for extra support/office hours). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  We've spent it the same as last year with a portion going towards teacher salary, parent engagement, teacher per session and the rest to supplies. Funds are used to give students who are academically at-risk the same opportunity to receive an equitable and high-quality educational and to close educational achievement gaps. Some of our funds are used to support parent and family engagement activities and programs. (This is where teacher per session comes in, teachers use these funds to stay late or come in early to meet with families and also to give students time to come in for extra support/office hours). 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We've spent the $8,798 for Non-title I We've spent it the same as last year with a portion going towards teacher salary, parent engagement, teacher per session and the rest to supplies. Funds are used to give students who are academically at-risk the same opportunity to receive an equitable and high-quality educational and to close educational achievement gaps. Some of our funds are used to support parent and family engagement activities and programs. (This is where teacher per session comes in, teachers use these funds to stay late or come in early to meet with families and also to give students time to come in for extra support/office hours). 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.333 Manhattan School for Children , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 333 Manhattan School for Children , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 42  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 44  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 3 School Name Manhattan School for Children Borough Manhattan School Number 333 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Claire Lowenstein Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katy Bowen Teacher/Subject Area Wendy Smith/ Literacy Teacher/Subject Area Mary Ann Schmidt/ ELA Related-Service Provider Erica Smolowitz Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Darlene Dooley Coach type here School Counselor Michelle Argumedo Parent Elizabeth Rivera Parent Coordinator Maxine Witherspoon Field Support Center Staff Member Matthew Manners Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 751 2018-19 CEP 46 Total number of ELLs 8 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.07%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of ELLs, our school uses TCRWP. The data provides insights about each student’s level of literacy in English. For example, the spelling inventory can be analyzed to assess students’ word knowledge and to plan word study and reading instruction. Not only do students’ spelling errors indicate their spelling ability, the spelling assessments also reveal what students know about the structure of words, as well as knowledge that they use when they read. Word study instruction in phonics, vocabulary, and spelling is based in large part on what is learned in these inventories. This information can then be used to drive targeted instruction for individual students, which can be shared with the ENL teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 47  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by looking at growth on the NYSESLAT, both the overall level and growth within modalities. We also look at students' scores on the various assessments, such as the ELA and the TCDYO. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The first data piece our school uses within the RTI framework is the low inference observation and brief history of the student. Next, teachers use tools from our "Resource Well." The second piece of data is the documentation of the use of resources from our "Resource Well." If necessary, more strategies/resources from the well can be implemented and documented. After four weeks have passed from the initial date of resource implementation, if we do not see noticable improvement, the teacher then signs up for PPT where a larger gathering of educators can discuss and plan for the next step. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. If we look at each modality separately across the grade and proficiency levels, the reading and writing modalities pose the greatest challenge to our students. Looking at modalities grouped together, one noticeable pattern is that students scored higher on reading and listening (receptive skills), than on writing and speaking (productive skills). Additionally, those students who have been in the U.S. longer and thus have acquired BICS, performed better on speaking and listening. Regarding the NYSITELL, we notice that students who place at the beginner level tend to be either newcomers or students with little exposure to literacy in either their home language or English. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. ENL services on the K-8 level are enacted through both the push-in and pull-out models. In all cases, content-based ENL is the chosen approach to instruction. As the linguistic, cultural, and social needs of ELLs are often situated in the realm of Social Studies, this content area is the primary vehicle of instruction, and, as a result, is often the context in which grammar and vocabulary are situated. Non-fiction readings do not comprise the entirety of instructional texts, as works of fiction and poetry are also the fodder of content-based study. At the 6th-8th grade level, the push-in model focusing on content-based instruction is preferred in academic classes when working with ELLs. Students are pulled out when their schedule permits a focus on the explicit teaching of English (grammar and vocabulary building). When students are pulled out in small groups, there is a maximum student/teacher ratio of 5/1. 2018-19 CEP 48  1b. For the most part, students are grouped by grade, however because we have a small number of ELLS, the ESL teacher often creates mixed grade groups. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The only program model offered at our school is ENL. We ensure that students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes by creating a schedule for the ENL teacher with the appropriate number of periods alotted for ENL instruction. Explicit ENL and ELA instructional minutes are also specified in the ENL teacher's schedule. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Throughout the K-8 ENL environments, content study is completed entirely in English. The full breadth of needs of ELLs (social and cultural assimilation included) necessitate that content become the vehicle for language teaching. Therefore, a content-based approach to ESL is the primary model of instruction. This approach is enacted through reading and writing on/about topics of curricular relevance to each student. Grammar and vocabulary are therefore studied in the context of content. Social Studies is often the content area in which grammar and language are situated, especially at the K-5 level. At the 6-8 level, the rigorous academic exigencies require that the content areas of Science and Mathematics are also explored in the content-based ESL model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Currently, the only evaluation conducted in a language other than English is the Spanish LAB. The Spanish LAB is administered by a common branch teacher whose native language is Spanish. The ENL teacher is present during LAB-R administration. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. Currently there are no SIFE students at Manhattan School for Children. Our instructional plan for potential SIFE students entails: promotion of native language and English literacy skills, and linguistic, cognitive, and academic development across content area subjects. 6b. The needs of newcomers are best satisfied by a pull-out approach in conjunction with a focus on scaffolding academic content. The study of vocabulary, reading, and writing are therefore consistent with the content-based model. For beginner students who are literate in their home language, translation through the use of a dictionary promotes the ability to connect prior knowledge of the student to any content-based study that is carried out in the ESL setting. 6c. The approach to ESL with students who have completed 4-6 years, is like all ENL instruction within MSC, based greatly on data that regards the reading and writing ability of students. Any instruction carried out by the ENL teacher mirrors the content being studied within the classrooms of ELLs. Content remains the vehicle of instruction, but research on individual students is paramount in the development of any skill-, grammar-, or vocabulary-based lessons. As the Teacher’s College 2018-19 CEP 49  Model is used within MSC, the assessment tools utilized within this model provide the means for research completed by the ENL teacher. These include TC Leveled Reading Assessments, Spelling Inventories, Running Records and conferences with teachers that gauge the use of reading skills and strategies. Input from the classroom teacher is also an important means for gathering data. Student-specific data permits the ENL teacher to formulate instruction that is specific to student needs. For all ELLs regardless of level, separate testing locations are secured to promote the success of these students. 6d. The approach to the instruction of Long-Term ELLs is very similar to that described above. In this case, ENL teacher focuses in particular on the grammar and language abilities that need to be promoted to ensure the academic success and long-term goal of English proficiency/fluency. 6e. For former ELLs (in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient), their performace is closely monitored by the classoom teacher who communicates regularly with the ENL teacher. Additional support is provided by the Response to Intervention team. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used by teachers of ELL-SWDs are specific to each child and include: -Review the IEP of each student. Know the specific needs of individual students and the resource personnel and technology needed to meet them. -Provide students with disabilities the opportunity to learn to use text to gain meaning; provide explicit reading instruction with modifications or accommodations. -Explicitly teach pro-social skills (e.g., cooperating with others, listening, asking for help). 􏰀 -Pre-teach or re-teach curricular content and provide additional guided practice before, after, or as appropriate, during class time. -Provide extended learning opportunities to increase a student’s rate of learning. In terms of materials, ELL-SWDs have access to adapted materials and assistive technology. Additionally, specialized seating, equipment, and tools are provided so students can complete assigned work. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our classes are heterogenous, which allows us to meet the diverse need of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school uses the RTI model, which includes weekly meetings. RTI members, which includes the ENL teacher, provide targeted instrution for students in need. The language of instruction is English. Our RTI model groups students for instruction for guided reading and intensive, targeted intervention. A teacher with strong Tier 1 instruction designs instruction based on rish domains and can explain how instruction was differentiated to address student needs. Additionally, progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about chnages in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whetehr to consider a referral for special education services. Progress monitoring can be used to determine when it is necessary to adjust instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, teachers can drop in during the weekly RTI meeting if they have a student about whom they are concerned. Additionally, we are now using an RTI School Implementation Planning Tool, adapted from Barbot's "RTI & ELL NYC Guidance Document and RTI Action Netowork." Also, one veteran AIS teacher is pushing in to help teachers with academically struggling students. Finally, SETSS teachers are also doing AIS this year. 2018-19 CEP 50  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school will not be discontinuing any programs or services/ 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs are available and open; translation is offered to families in completing applications to after school programs; students participate in after school sports, drama, art, science and music programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include big books, Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas, Avenues from Hampton-Brown, and a library of leveled books. Newcomers in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixt grade use the Visions series from Thomson/Heinle as well as Hit the Ground Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options Publishing. The ESL teacher also consults the Teachers College Readers and Writers workshop manual for units of study. Orton-Gillingham phonics materials are used, such as picture-sound cards. The ENL teacher aslo uses lessons from Month by Month Phonics by Dorothy P. Hall and Patricia M. Cunningham. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In terms of native language support, the ENL teacher has books in Spanish for students to read and take home to read with their family. Additionally, the school has purchased biglingual dictionaries for Hebrew and German-speaking students to use during the regular school day, as well as on state tests. Materials in other languages are purchased as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher groups students by grade, or consecutive grades, such as 4th and 5th in order to provide services that support ELLs ages and grade levels. Resources also correspond to age and grade. For example, a newcomer in the 8th grade would have high-interest, low-level reading materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include big books, Oxford Picture Dictionary for the Content Areas, Avenues from Hampton-Brown, and a library of leveled books. Newcomers in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixt grade use the Visions series from Thomson/Heinle as well as Hit the Ground Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options Publishing. The ESL teacher also consults the Teachers College Readers and Writers workshop manual for units of study. Orton-Gillingham phonics materials are used, such as picture-sound cards. The ENL teacher aslo uses lessons from Month by Month Phonics by Dorothy P. Hall and Patricia M. Cunningham. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New families are invited to class picnics and mentored by buddy families at the school. The parent coordinator, Maxine Witherspoon, is instrumental in reaching out to new families and connecting them with a buddy family. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Grades 7 and 8 th are offered Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 51  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paaraprofessionals, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries and parent coordinator receive PD during our school's half-day Friday, which takes place on the first Friday of each month. Teachers meet and plan interventions with our on-staff ENL and literacy intervention teachers; the school follows the Teachers College Reading and Writing project model. Areas covered include vocabulary development, with a focus on previewing content area vocabulary, accessing and building on background knowledge, building language contexts in the classroom and providing multiple modes for student access and response to instruction. Additionally, upper grade teams (4-8) meet and plan with an on site literacy lead teacher/coach. Teachers receive professional development from Teacher's College, which is alligned to the Common Core. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Transitioning from elementary to middle school is not an issue in our school because we are a K-8 school. For the transition from middle school to high school, students are encouraged to attend SIELP (Summer Intensive English Language Program). The guidance couselor assists the ENL teacher and students/families with the application process. PD ecords are kept in the main office by the Principal. As a TC Reading and Writing Project School, all staff is involved in comprehensive literacy based training that addresses supporting students wil different language capacities and needs. Teachers work with TC staff developers and attend TC calendar days. Minutes of those meetings are maintained and attendance is kept. The PD titles for this year include: "how formative assessment impacts rigorous instruction," "how can we use the reading/writing pathway book as a tool to improve instruction and increase student independence," and "how can the testing as a genre unit highlight students' reading and writing strenghts and build confidence in reluctant readers." Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher will reach out and meet with students and their families weekly during the family engagement time. Interpretation and translation is offered to families thru the DOE Translation Unit, or via volunteers/families who speak the same language. MSC's parent body is very active. You will always find family members helping out around the school, working in the classrooms, planning wit staff and sharing their talents and apssions to enhance teaching and learning at MSC. Many different languages are represented. Our website is now able to translate documents, newlsetters and other school publications. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. See question 1 above. The school partners with the Beacon Program (extended day), which offers on-site ENL and "English Language Practice Nights" to families 2018-19 CEP 52  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Claire Lowenstein, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Manhattan School for Children School DBN: 03M333 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Claire Lowenstein Title Principal Darlene Dooley Assistant Principal Maxine Witherspoon Parent Coordinator Katy Bowen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Rivera Parent Wendy Smith/Literacy Teacher/Subject Area Mary Ann Schmidt/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michelle Argumedo School Counselor Ilene Altschul Matthew Manners Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Erica Smolowitz Other Related Service Prov Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 6/27/15 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M333 School Name: Manhattan School for Children Superintendent: I. Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The following documents are used to assess language preferences of ur parent community: HLIS, and Student Emergency Contact sheet. A survey is sent to families at the start of the school year asking families what their language prefference is. The survey is sent in many languages: English, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian, Korean Russian Spanish, and Urdo. Parent Coordinator follows up with families that do not respond, or do not hand in the HLIS and Emergency Card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 56 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Hebrew, Spanish, Urdu and Madarin 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The School Handbook is given to families each year, electronically. It is available on our website (which has the ability to be translated in any language). Class newsletters, calendars , and letters from the Principal are also sent on a weekly basis, and are available on our website. Families wo have requested that written information be sent in a language other than english (this year the languages requested are Hebrew, Spanish, Urdy, Mandarin) are sent their information in their language of choice. Such information includes, but is not limited to parent-teacher conference announcements, afterschool information, testing dates, curriculum news, parent events, performances, etc. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 57  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night is held in September, Parent Teacher conferences happen three times during the year, families have the opportunity to meet with teachers every Tuesday during Parent Engagement Time, SLT and PTA meets once a month, the Principal holds Chat With Claire (open meeting where families have the opportunity to ask questions and address concerns), and student work celebrations are held throughout the year. Infomal interactions happen on a daily/weekly basis. Parents/families have the opportunity to meet with our Guidance Counselors (bilingual), Social worker (bilingual), Psychologist, Parent Coordinator and/or Community Assistant. The attendane teacher is aailable once a week. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The above documents are given to families when families register their children, during Curriculum Night and are also sent home to families who (in the language preference survey) request written information/oral communication in language other than English. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator, along with the Business Manger, will manage the language preference survey. PC will also survey parents during the school year to find out if families are receiving all they need in this area. The PC will also attend PTA and SLT meetings to find out from parent leadership what the needs of the families are. 2018-19 CEP 59 
