2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M334 School Name: THE ANDERSON SCHOOL Principal: JODI HYDE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Anderson School 03M334 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: NA K-8 100 West 77 Street 212.595.7193 School Number (DBN): 212.496.2854 Fax: Jodi Hyde jhyde@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jodi Hyde Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dianne Kirksey-Floyd Kelly Opdyke Lisa Gill N/A TBD N/A N/Ahyare S District Information Geographical District: 03 Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93rd Street, New York, NY 10025 Superintendent’s Office Address: IAltsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 678-5857 Phone Number: (212) 222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, New York NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jodi Hyde Dianne Kirksey-Floyd Kelly Opdyke N/A N/A TBD N/A N/A Lisa Gill Maria Givens Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Representative to the SLT Member/Parent K-2 Representative 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary Lou Kozol Lance Kam Megan Reidy JenThaler Michael Mucha Dongli Huang Justine Keil Pam Flint Mike Fox Member/ K-2 Teacher Representative Member/Parent 3-5 Representative Member/ 3-5 Teacher Representative Member/Parent 6-8 AMS Representative Member/6-8 AMS Teacher Representative Member/Parent K-4 at large Representative Member/Parent 5-8 at large Representative Member/Teacher Elementary School at Large Member/Teacher Middle School at Large Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the Anderson School is to foster active problem solvers and independent, creative thinkers in an intellectually stimulating environment. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Anderson School/PS 334 is a unique K-8 New York City public school located on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. It serves a citywide population of students who scored in the 99th percentile of the OLSAT and Naglieri test, as given by the DOE. In order to provide this environment we work closely with the PTA and their fundraising efforts. This fundraising has enabled collaborations with Symphony Space, American Museum of Natural History, Dancing Classrooms, New York Chess Kids, Asia Society, New-York Historical Society, among others. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. It serves a citywide population of students who scored in the 99th percentile of the OLSAT and Naglieri test, as given by the DOE. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which The Anderson School made the most progress over the past year includes Collaborative Teaching and Supportive Environment. Our work with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project enabled teachers to visit each others’ classrooms to watch lessons and participate in ongoing professional development. In regards to Supportive Environment, our school’s work last year revamping our Social-Emotional curriculum helped us re-establish our commitment to a school culture where students feel safe and supported. The key areas of focus for this year are Rigorous Instruction, in terms of developing and expanding STEM instruction in the elementary and middle school, and Supportive Environment, where we will build on our work with our Social-Emotional learning to develop a school-wide SEL vocabulary. We have determined that there is an added need for the students to develop self-regulation of emotions throughout various daily transitions and activities to support social and academic success. Embarking on this next phase of our support of the whole child will result in the development of kindness and compassion for ourselves, for other people, and for the bigger world. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M334 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 537 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 18 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 18 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 8.0% 6.9% 0.2% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 9.1% 51.2% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.09 3% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 97.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 4 97.1% 1.3% 6.5% 2.8% 27.0% 9.9% 4 17% 6.4 97.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Anderson School prides itself on the delivery of rigorous instruction across all subject areas. We present an accelerated curriculum to support the needs of our advanced, intrinsically motivated students. With the firm establishment of the TC ELA/Writing program at Anderson, writing continues to serve as the foundation for critical thinking and expression across grades and subject areas. Complementing that understanding with the best practices for gifted education, will help teachers provide more highly differentiated instruction and will help students approach challenges in writing in a structured and reassuring environment that promotes "supported risk". We will continue to expand upon the TC curriculum with our staff developer and work to align the TC units with what we know about our learners. During the 2017-18 school year, Shanna Schwartz of TCRWP visited our school to support our staff developer and teachers in the K-2 classrooms. During this visit her major noticing involved the fact that our students are the highest of readers and while their writing is advanced, she argues that the students can be pushed to achieve higher levels of writing, with the goal of meeting their level of reading. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grades 1 & 2 teachers will expand the standard TC ELA/writing curriculum to improve writing outcomes in elaboration (including vocabulary and sentence structure), conventions, and organization resulting in a 10 percent improvement of students as measured by pre to post rubric scores. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in Teachers' College professional development focused on writing outcomes. 2. Teachers will work to embed best practices for gifted learners (i.e. Bloom's taxonomy, Gardner's Multiple Intelligences and the Renzulli Triad model) by reading articles, chapters from books and having collaborative conversations. 3. Teachers will conduct pre and post assessments on a unit of writing. Teachers in grades 1 and 2 August 2018- June 2019 Administration and teachers Teachers in grades 1 and 2 August 2018-June 2019 Administration and teachers Students in grades 1 and 2 August 2018-June 2019 Administration and teachers Students in grades 1 and 2 4. Teachers along with the TCRWP staff developer, will continue to refine units of study to push student writing performance. Administrators and teachers August 2018-June 2019 5. Revisit paper choice for our students, specifically second graders. Teachers in grades 1 and 2 August 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Staff Developer, and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and members of the administration will support families' understanding of rigorous instruction at curriculum night, parent teacher conferences in the Fall 2018, quarterly publishing parties, biannual principal grade-level meetings and monthly general PTA meetings. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a combination of Tax Levy and parent funds, including a private PTA grant, a TC staff developer will be paid to work with 1-2 teachers to revise curriculum and attend workshops as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, students will display a 8% increase in the post assessment as measured by rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data collection of student performance on the TC Progressions and rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Anderson School values the education of the whole child as a major lever towards student progress and achievement. We have implemented a three phase Social Emotional Program. In phase 1, as part of the 2014-15 CEP we focused on refining the Social Emotional Learning (SEL) curriculum through the creation and presentation of a cohesive K-8 curriculum focusing on the implementation of action-aware concepts (e.g. integrity, responsibility, and respect). Phase 2 of our SEL work focused on the internal actions, primarily mindfulness and kindness, in order to continue with personal growth in our students as part of the 2015-16 and 2016-2017 CEPs. Phase 3 of our SEL work provided additional tools in the emotional support toolbox of our students using the RULER program (Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence). The next phase of our SEL program will include a revision of our 4-7 Advisory program and the launch of an eighth grade pilot program as a part of our collaboration with the Facing History organization. In our environment of high expectations and perfectionism (common among gifted students) there is an added need for attention to the Social and Emotional needs of our students to support all constituents of our community, faculty, students, and parents. In order to foster and promote a growth mindset we will narrow our focus to develop resilient learners with the support of a Facing History Advisory curriculum for eighth grade students based on an increase in OORS reports due to what we believe to be a lack of empathy and/or self motivation in 2017-18 as well as based on conversations related to these incidents among then eighth grade students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, eighth grade students will think and act like global citizens, display empathy and resolve conflicts peacefully as evidenced by a decrease of 50% in OORS reports among eighth grade students. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Eighth grade teachers will attend professional development in the Facing History Advisory Program Grade 8 Advisory Teachers June 2018-June 2019 The formation of an Advisory Committee to revise our current 4-7 advisory program. Select members of faculty and guidance counselor June 2018-June 2019 School leaders, teachers, and Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor, Ruler program committee, and K-8 homeroom teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers, Facing History staff developer All teachers, staff, eighth grade students Sept 2018-June 2019 8th grade advisory teachers Visual cues in classrooms and common space: Ruler quadrant and word walls. Incorporate cohesive supports across the entire day; including lunch and recess Monthly meetings with Anderson eighth grade advisory teachers and staff developers from Facing History to process and support the new advisory program. 2018-19 CEP 16  Provide/utilize teacher collaboration time (PD) to discuss best practices and problem solve social-emotional learning issues thorough THE RULER Program curriculum All staff Sharing of common language regarding the RULER program among families and faculty. All staff and students June 2018-June 2019 Grade 8 teachers Administration and SEL committee June 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisory programs will be presented to parents at Meet the Teacher Night and general PTA meetings. Megan Freund, Facing History Liaison for Anderson and 7/8 grade teacher, will lead the Facing History Advisory curriculum with Karen Scher of Facing History and turn key the curriculum to Mike Fox, Taviel Guren, and Karen Kabahar our teacher advisors. The Facing History advisory group will review lessons weekly and meet monthly with Karen Scher to plan and assess progress in the program. Gail Ridder, guidance counselor, will lead our grades 4-7 Advisory program. She will provide resources of year-long lessons and a timeline/calendar for our grades 4-7 advisory teachers. Gail will meet with our advisory teachers monthly to assess student progress and review lessons with advisory teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a combination of Tax Levy and parent funds, including a private PTA grant, will be used to pay for the next phase of our ongoing SEL program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the February 2019, students in grade 8 will show a 50% decrease in OORS reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Anderson School prides itself on the delivery of rigorous instruction across all subject areas. We present an accelerated curriculum to support the needs of our advanced, intrinsically motivated students. Much of our success is based on teachers who are able to collaborate and create and deliver high expectation lessons. In the last three years our method of delivery has shifted to include ICT classes within our K-8 school. This year, for the first time, we have four ICT classes- 4th grade, 6th grade, 7th grade, and 8th grade. The teachers in these classrooms have demonstrated tremendous dedication to ensure the success of all students in these classes. In order to support these teacher teams, we have determined a need for more staff development and additional planning/collaboration time. According to the research, the most successful methods of instruction within an ICT classroom are station and parallel teaching. With that in mind, and with the support of our Goldmansour and Rutherford staff developer, we will increase the number of lessons our teachers offer using these methods. These teaching methods can be measured in Advance 1E, designing coherent instruction. Last year, teachers performed an average of 3.32 in this component. The goal is to have our ELA ICT teams utilize these teaching models more frequently, at least 50% of the time, and to have teacher average in 1E increase to 3.48 by February and 3.65 by June. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ELA ICT teacher teams in grades 4, 6, 7, and 8 will ensure 50% of instruction in their ICT classrooms will demonstrate parallel or station teaching, resulting in a 10% increase in designing coherent instruction, as measured by Danielson 1E in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ICT teacher teams will participate in intervisitations with ICT models in use. ICT ELA teams The teachers will participate in collaborative conversations with a staff developer from Goldmansour and Rutherford incorporating best practices of ICT instruction. ICT ELA teams September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administration Administration, staff developer, general education and ICT teachers. Teacher teams will incorporate various models of ICT instruction into their weekly plans, including parallel teaching and station teaching as observed by administration. ICT ELA teams Teacher teams will have additional planning time incorporated into their schedule to support their planning, goal setting, and data review for all students in the ICT classes. ICT ELA teams ICT teachers will meet weekly to discuss well written development of IEPs and goals as well as data collection. ICT teachers and Special Education Liaison September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, staff developer, general education and ICT teachers. Administration, general education and ICT teachers. Administration, ICT teachers and Special Education Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will present and introduce themselves to parents during Meet the Teacher night. During that time teachers will explain their goal of meeting all students' needs. Principal will discuss the goal of ICT classrooms at affected grade level morning meetings with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a combination of Tax Levy and parent funds, including a private PTA grant, teacher teams will be scheduled to meet on a weekly basis, on site PD will be presented to teacher teams through staff developer from Goldmansour and Rutherford, they will attend professional development with Teacher's College and attend off-site teacher calendar days at Columbia University. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ELA ICT Teacher Teams in grades 4, 6, 7, and 8 will demonstrate a 5% growth in Danielson's 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Anderson is a small tight-knit learning community where stakeholders share responsibility in the successes of the school. Historically, parents and teachers have worked independently to share responsibility on most tasks outside of the School Leadership Team. In 2017-2018, we achieved 77% of all Anderson pedagogues (K-8) taking a leadership role within the school community. Using different action plan items in 2018-2019, the school will continue to seek teacher leadership. To promote shared responsibility, Anderson teachers will continue to reflect on their strengths and to identify areas where their talent and leadership will be most successful in aligning with school improvement goals. Anderson teachers are at the top of their field in providing rigorous, creative instruction for their gifted students. Administration continues to recognize these unique talents and will provide encouragement and opportunity for teachers to expand their professional life in areas of leadership and to share their experiences with their colleagues. There will be a school created survey which mimics the NYC survey to assess progress throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the NYC School Survey results will demonstrate a 10% growth in effective leadership. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal will host a monthly Think Tank to discuss current topics within the Anderson School. Monday PD will involve opportunities to explore and update the mission and vision of the school. Teachers Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers attending professional development will share their learning through a reflection sheet and an opportunity to turnkey their learning. Hiring committees including teachers will be assembled to ensure teacher voice in hiring. The Principal will run Student Council and the Student Council president (or his/her designee) will sit on the SLT. Teacher reflection sheets about programming in order to determine their effectiveness, success, and next steps. Teachers and Admin Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Principal and AMS students Teachers and Administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Learning Rounds will include all teachers by the end of the school year. Teachers and Administration 2018-19 CEP 23 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration A school created survey will be administered to teachers. Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are provided an abundance of workshops including cyber safety, mental health issues, and sex education to better support their children at home. The principal shares these opportunities with the families at her grade level morning meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a combination of Tax Levy and parent funds, including a private PTA grant, supplies will be purchased for curriculum, training, and events as identified by teacher leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a school created survey, similar to the NYC School Survey will be administered and demonstrate a 8% growth in effective leadership. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Anderson School community consists of families and faculty with a focus on growth and improvement in our community as well as the community of others. We have mandatory community service hours expected of our middle school students. We collaborate with each other and the surrounding community to support the elderly, the homeless, as well as the younger students within our school. We have piloted programs to ensure students understand the importance of recycling, reducing, and reusing. We have connected to the community by offering opportunities to be part of our Green Team. In addition, the Anderson school is part of District 3 schools. To broaden and diversify our student and parent community, Anderson seeks to promote access to great schools with the creation of a diversity admissions plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Anderson School will offer 20% of its 2019-2020 K seats to a targeted group of students with the intent to increase diversity as measured by final SEMS ATS Enrollment. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? An equity team consisting of teachers, administrators, and parents will explore the options for a priority group. Teachers, Admin, Parents Spring 2018-Fall 2018 Administration, Teachers, Parents Information regarding the request for testing will be distributed and posted in our targeted areas. Prospective families We will purchase a plethora of books to ensure students read books with "windows" and "mirrors" and see themselves and others within the literature they have been exposed to. Teachers Parents, Parent Coordinator, Principal, Teachers Administration Fall 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Create a post-admission family support program to ensure the success of all students at our school. New families Spring 2019 Teachers and Teachers and staff will participate in equity training through a variety of PD workshops. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement administration Teachers and administration September 2018-June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families participate in the creation of the equity goal, the sharing of it with potential families, and the community. Parents are encouraged to take on leadership opportunities within the school in such capacities as green team and fundraising. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a combination of Tax Levy and parent funds, supplies, resources, and volunteered time to ensure the information is shared to all families in the target zone. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, the Anderson School will develop a diversity admissions plan to provide 20% of our 2019-2020 K seats to a diverse population. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SEMS and ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Academic need per F and P reading benchmark system, writing samples, ongoing conferring and assessment. Students in the lowest percentile of the NYSELAtest. Academic need per assessments Students in the lowest percentile of the NYSMath test Academic need per assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) iStation program: interactive adaptive computer reading program Small group instruction and individualized instruction GOAL group Specialized target intervention group Great Leaps fluency program K-4 One-to-one AI teacher Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day During test preparation time, selected students in afterschool Repeated work and support ALEKS.com RTIprogram GOAL group AI teacher Repeated work and instruction GOAL group Small group instruction and individualized instruction During the school day Specialized target intervention group Small group Small group instruction and individualized instruction Specialized target intervention group Small group instruction and individualized instruction During test preparation time, selected students in afterschool During the school day During the school day Social Studies Academic need per assessments Repeated work and instruction GOAL group 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Life events and parent consent Behavioral need Specialized target intervention group Small group Banana Splits group During the school day Social skills group Small group Spectrum group Small group Self-selected (6-8 only) 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Zero 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  The child transferred to another school without being in attendance here. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received $800 for STH. Although scheduled, we only spent $63 while the student was enrolled. He now attends another DOE school. 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 33  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 34   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESEA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. The Anderson School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESEA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Anderson School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The Anderson School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESEA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 38  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Anderson School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESEA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESEA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Anderson School Borough Manhattan School Number 334 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jodi Hyde Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Alyssa Volpe Teacher/Subject Area Heather Levine Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Nicole Chandonnet Coach N/A School Counselor Gail Ridder Parent Diane Heath Parent Coordinator Ana Crenovich Field Support Center Staff Member Matthew Angell Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 537 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.56% 2018-19 CEP 42  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Throughout the year, ELLs are given formal and informal assesments to evaluate the students' language acquisition. Conferring notes, running records, student writing portfolios, ongoing content assessments and formal assessments such as baseline assessments, E-Class and periodic assessments are used to inform and differentiate instruction across content area instruction. The NYSESLAT is currently used as a baseline formal evaluation to determine the ELLs' proficiency level and to measure their English acquisition across all four modalities. Providing ELL students teaching in all four modalities across the school year will also be considered in supporting students to achieve proficiency levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data from E-Class, content, baseline, and periodic assessments will be reviewed by the LAP team and used to inform instructional planning weekly by teacher teams and the TESOL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 43  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs in several ways. We measure their annual yearly progress and proficiency level across the four modalities and classroom success with F&P, E-Class, iStation, and formative content assessments aligned with the school's curriculum. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessment data is used to determine a student's ability to meet the goal of a learning standard. If summative data determines that a student needs to review a topic, students will have re-teach opportunities and larger concepts divided into shorter tasks and learning assignments. If a child has received mastery, new goals are set by the team with the child for the next learning standard. Information is shared by the LAP team with pedagogical staff who instruct the teacher to promote cross-curricular learning and reinforce TESOL support structures. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention (RTI) model is used to provide our ELLs with differentiated and scaffolded instruction, as well as tracking students' progress based on performance data on E-class, iStation, F&P scores, and content assessments. This set of guidance documents assists classroom teachers, instructional leaders, and ELL support services with RTI implementation plan. Once an ELL student's performance data is analyzed by the teacher team and TESOL teacher, an ELL student's instruction is differentiated in accordance with the tier levels of the RTI model. The progress is constantly monitored and used to inform the instruction, and possibly, if the rate is still much lower than the peers from the same background, make instructional decisions such as re-teach and concepts divided into shorter tasks and learning assignments. Currently our ELL students are performing across all content areas on grade level or above grade level in a gifted and talented school. ELL students are grouped with other EP students who are also performing on/ about the same academic achievement levels. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT it is revealed that students tend to reach proficiency in reading and listening first. The data for our school also indicates that most students tend to test proficient in first or second grade. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. ELA and Math exams and Regents exams will be used if/when we have an ELL student in third through eighth grade. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data from NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exams are provided first to the LAP team and then the LAP team shares the data with teacher teams and the TESOL teacher to differentiate and scaffold instruction as necessary. The LAP team prepares and share instructional strategies for pedagogical staff outside of the primary and TESOL teachers to reinforce strategies throughout all classes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 44  Since Andersen only has three ELL students that requires 90-180 minutes of Services, the integrated services are carried out in the students' classrooms during reading, writing, and science. These services are delivered by the TESOL teacher and his classroom teacher. The TESOL teacher and the classroom teacher meet weekly to differentiate and scaffold instruction for the ELL students-this includes designing supportive groups for group work activities, choosing leveled readers, dividing larger assignments into smaller assignments, previewing of vocabulary prior to whole class lessons, and sentence prompts as necessary. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Andersen only offers the ENL program. We currently only have three eligible ELLs- two at the commanding level (requiring 90 minutes) and the other at expanding (180 minutes of instruction). The explicit ELA/ENL minutes are delivered in the students' classrooms using integrated teaching by the ENL teacher and their classroom teachers(push in). With this push-in model the classroom teacher is teaching the lesson and the ENL teacher is differentiating the main lesson with support structures to meet the instructional goals set by the teacher team for the ELL students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL instruction is delivered using ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response, realia, and scaffolding. Specifically, TPR is used by the ENL teacher when providing direct instruction to the child that mirrors the classroom teacher's instruction with supports of having the child move with the instruction, such method is used with directions where the child will be told the step by the ENL teacher and then required to use a physcial whole-body approach to complete a task/command., this is also used when in reading when the ENL teacher will break the story into commands and the child will act out the story as commands(details) from the story are given in a sequential order to tell the story. The ENL teacher also provides instruction in phonics, reading, writing, social studies and mathematics with curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area teachers and ENL teacher collaborate in planning lessons that are aligned to the CCLS but also differentiated to meet the needs of the ELL student.s 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Currently we do not have an NLA program and therefore, we do not evaluate a child's native language. We do support an ELL student's native language by providing curricula materials if available in their native language throughout the content areas, as well as glossaries and dictionaries. ELL students are also provided web-based sites that provide students with instruction in their native language as well as content specific instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently the Anderson School has no SIFE students. In the event that we do receive SIFE students, we will provide mandated services according to their proficiency level and provide both an ESL teacher and AIS teacher who will accelerate students' learning in acquiring both English proficiency and higher levels of academic achievement. Students who have been in school less than three years receive instruction based on their needs. The student receives instruction that is rich in language development which emphasizes phonics and reading strategies. If the student's proficiency 2018-19 CEP 45  level is entering or emergent, they receive instruction for 360 minutes a week; transitioning or expanding 180 minutes . The ENL teacher works very closely with the classroom teacher and together develops scaffolding techniques to help enhance the students learning. The ESL teacher will also help the students with the test components and use resources such as the Kaplan Test Prep Guides. Currently we do not have any ELLs receiving service between 4-6 years or any long Term ELLs. If we did, we would develop a long term plan, including regular meetings between the classroom teacher, ESL teacher and school administration to ensure strategies are being used and developed to foster their language growth and needs. Former ELLs within two years of scoring proficient(2 students currently) are given support from the ESL teacher determined by formal assessment and ongoing academic class performance. These needs are determined and assessed by the ESL and current classroom teacher of the former ELL that meet weekly to ensure that a student is provided transitional ESL instructional support. Instructional supports include: print rich classrooms to support independent learning, photographs, infographs, and charts when appropriate to support texts, long assignments designed with shorter deadlines, removing 'fluff' from learning as necessary to assist with comprehension of new concepts and texts, flexible grouping and daily small group instruction, and reading of directions on assessments when needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All classroom teachers and the ESL teacher collaborate on articulating content specific standards and ESL strategies being utilized to support student learning in both acquiring English proficiency and higher academic achievement levels. Presently, all of our ELLS are identified as gifted and talented. Students take the DOE Gifted and Talented test, and must score at least 97 percentile to be eligible to attend the Anderson School. We consider the giftedness component as the students learn the English language. If any student has special needs in addition to giftedness and ESL, we would work as a team with other professionals who work on their special needs. If the ELL-SWD has an IEP both the mandated goals, the integrety of their IEP will be honored, as will the ELL mandates. Teachers in grades K-3(grades of our ELL students) use E-class, iStation, F& P leveled books, and the Teachers College curriculum to support ELL-SWDs with academic content and language acquistion. Within these supports teachers have flexible grouping, daily small group instruction for ELL students, reading of directions, simplifying of tasks/removal of 'fluff', "chunking "of assignments, previews of vocabulary, and activities to promote vocabulary connections to home language and prior learned English words. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Although we currently do not have any registered ELL-SWDs, the school would collaborate with the classroom and ENL teacher, IEP team as well as the school's leadership team where the ELL-SWD student could be scheduled with a flexible program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently we offer a computerized phonics and reading program I-Station which supports ELA, Social Studies, and all content subjects This program is offered to all of our ELL students regardless of level and is provided in English. This program is designed to differentiate instruction based on the ELL student's academic performance. ENL strategies are also provided by the ENL teacher to support the student's learning during class instruction for students of all ELL subgroups. Long term assignments in ELA, Social Studies, and Science are divided into smaller tasks with frequent deadlines and explicit instructions. Additionally, books are provided in advance for students to preview and prepare prior to class lessons and then the ESL teacher supports with parallel teaching of the lesson the classroom teacher is providing. The Landmark West Preservation Group works with classes on architecture, developing vocabulary and social studies content for students of all ELL subgroups at the first grade level. The ENL teacher collaborates with the instructor in order to pre-teach vocabulary and provide additional scaffolding. Small group instruction throughout content areas like math, science and social studies using scaffolding and various ENL methodologies help to address the specific needs of our ENL students at all ELL subgroup levels. Charts, graphs, 2018-19 CEP 46  pictures, and pictograms are used to support texts in Social Studies and Science classes. All services are provided in English in our gifted and talented school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Anderson has currently become a TC (Teacher's College) school. All programs and school improvements have concentrated on aligning all curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards. Both the ENL teachers and all classroom teachers meet to assess and align content-specific programs to the CCLS. All pedagogy and the school's leadership work to revise CCLS units of study that have been designed to provide students with engaging and rigorous curricula across all content areas. For this year, data shows that our math curriculum needs improvement based on E-Cam and Math state assessment scores. Anderson has hired an Aussie Math consultant who is working with teachers to implement Number Talks and Table Top center activities to differentiate classroom instruction. Teacher teams meet weekly to differentiate homework assignments for students based on weekly assessed levels. Teacher teams are aligning their math curriculum to CCLS with appropriate acceleration by one grade level and expansion on topics to enrich learning when necessary. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs in our school programs. Our after school Wingspan Program is open to our ELLs. Invitations to participate are sent to all families by our Parent Coordinator and all students are welcome to participate in the program. All aspects of our curriculum involve differentiated ENL instruction where individual needs are met. When ELL students are in state testing grades, afterschool academies with specific focus on preparing for the exams is offered to ELL students as an additional support. Anderson does not offer before school nor Saturday academies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include dictionaries and glossaries(ELA, SS, Science, Math), authentic literature (ELA, Social Studies), games and manipulatives(Math), laptops and ipads(ELA, SS) , iStation(ELA) Smart Boards (all subject areas), Fountas and Pinnell(ELA) and citywide performance assessments(ELA and Math) . Texts are provided in written and audio versions when necessary. Visuals supplement texts for additional comprehension support. In addition to these materials, the use of ENL methodologies support their use. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Books and computer programs are available in home language (our current ELLs). Students keep book logs and conference to discuss their reading with the classroom teacher and ESL teacher weekly. When Spanish is the home language teachers use the Newsela website for news articles in the home language to provide support to English non-fiction texts- English texted are provided at a lower word count and Spanish texts at a higher word count so that ELL students can participate in classroom conversations (Turn and Talk) with classmates using level English vocabulary but have the same conceptual understanding as the non-ELL classmates because the text is also provided in the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since we only currently have three ELLs, all of their required services, support, and resources correspond directly to the content in the ELLs' grade level and their individual language needs. Materials the teacher will be using with the class are previewed and vocabulary is pre-taught as well. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support ELLs include dictionaries, glossaries, authentic literature, games,lap tops,iPads,and iStation Smart Boards, Fountas and Pinnell and citywide performance assessments . In addition to these materials, the use of ENL methodologies support their use. 2018-19 CEP 47  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities that assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year include the ability of parents to contact the Spanish and ENL teacher for materials and reading lists for use during the summer to preview curriculum. Parents are invited to Parent workshops where the ENL teacher will provide parents with an overview of the child's curriculum on the grade level, as well as web sites, books and materials that will support the ELL student acquiring English proficiency. Anderson provided information sessions first and then group tours for students admitted to the school as it is a gifted and talented school for which students need to score at least 97% on an intelligence test for admission. After deciding to enroll in Anderson, families are administered the HLIS and receive a welcome package for the school. Kindergarten orientation is provided for all families, including ELLs, as it is when most students enter our school. Individual orientations are offered for the rare acceptance offered after kindergarten entry. Tours, information sessions, and orientations are provided by the Parent Coordinator, the Business Coordinator, school teachers, and school administration. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The Anderson School offers Spanish as an elective to all students, including ELLs from grades K-8. Spanish Spanish class is offered once a week for K-4 students, two to three periods for middle school students, depending on their grade. Eighth grade students take the LOTE exam. All K-2 students have chess once a week, which develops their language skills. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development for classroom teachers includes: an Teacher's College literacy consultant who provides support to teachers on appropriate pedagological strategies for ELLs(9 dates that run in three week cycles throughout the school year- 10/6, 10/20, 10/31, 12/7, 1/9, 1/16, 1/23, 3/9, 3/16, 3/23, 6/4 by Allyse Bader). The OELL provides additional professional development to our ENL teacher and faculty. The certified ENL teacher is a resource to our classroom teachers during articulation periods and provides ENL support in class and during grade meetings in differentiating instruction for meeting the students needs. Workshops offered by Teachers College in reading and writing are recommended for ENL and classroom teachers of ELLs in order to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, teachers are encouraged to attend workshops offered by the school's network (cross curriculum). These workshops are geared toward ELL instruction with Common Core Standards in mind(see above dates). 4. In addition to the workshops and staff developments mentioned in question 1, our ENL teacher will provide staff development in ENL methodologies and techniques to train the staff as per Jose P. Per Jose P, we will be offering professional development workshops this year on best practices and ENL methodologies, scaffolding for ELLs, guided reading, guided writing, shared writing, and how to jumpstart newcomers using Words Their Way for newcomer ELLs (Mondays 2:40-4:00pm bimonthly and during teacher team meetings). The ENL teacher will also attend calendar days at Teachers College(10/3, 10/19, 12/14) and turnkey the workshop to our staff. She will also attend planning meetings with the teachers that she pushes 2018-19 CEP 48  in with to help them plan their instruction, and lunch time meetings to discuss the needs of the ELL population. An attendance sheet is taken for the Professional Development meetings that teachers attend. This ensures that records are maintained. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At this time we do not need staff support to assist ELLs as they transition from elemenary to middle school and high school, as we do not have any ELL students transitioning to middle school or high school. In the event that we have ELLs transitioning, we will provide staff and parents of ELLs meetings. These meetings will ensure a smooth transition. In order to meet the professional requirements as per CR Part 154.2: The ENL teacher and administration provide training opportunities from the OELL and Teachers College to the teachers of ELLs so that they may ensured that 15% of their total training hours, will be scheduled in ELL specific professional development. Bilingual/ENL teachers will be scheduled for 50% of their their professional development will be ELL specific. Records will be maintained both by both the individual teacher and the office. PD is provided Mondays from 2:40-4:00pm bimonthly by Nicole Chandonnet and Pamela Flint and TC PD is provided on the following dates: 10/6, 10/20, 10/31, 12/7, 1/9, 1/16, 1/23, 3/9, 3/16, 3/23, 6/4 by Allyse Bader and 10/3, 10/19, 12/14 by Teacher's College staff. The office maintains records through a binder that keeps agendas for allin house conferences. Teachers collect and maintain individual agendas and maintain record of their PD hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Anderson corresponds with their ELL parents often through email, phone calls and one on one parent meetings . The annual meeting which will discuss the goals of our ELL program, the student's individual progress is scheduled by the ENL teacher with the parent, at their convenience. Since there are only three ELLs at Anderson, the parents are able to schedule meetings more frequently if they would prefer. After ELL status is designated after HLIS survey administration and a student interview is conducted by the LAP team. If it is determined that a student needs to take the NYSITELL the parent is contacted and the test is administered by the LAP team. Results are shared with the parents and parents are educated on program options for their child in the NYCDOE and at Anderson. Three times a year the parents have a formal conference with the ESL teacher and the classroom teachers to discuss student progress and set goals. At the end of each year annual meetings are held with the LAP team, classroom teacher, and parents to set goals for the following year. Parents are communicated with in English and/or home language when preference is indicated. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Once we identify our students as an ELL, parents meet informally with the ENL teacher to determine which program is most appropriate for their child. After the parents select a program for their child, the school holds two informational meetings per academic year to discuss the program and the students progress. In the Spring, the school meets with parents to discuss the NYSESLAT. The Anderson School holds multiple parent teacher conferences during which student progress is discussed with the parents, classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. Parents ensure that their child work on academic assignments daily, they read with their child every day and they create a supportive home environment for learning and studying. Our school also provides parent workshops throughout the school year particularly in helping parents understand the Common Core Standards. At these parent workshops translators are available if parents do not speak English. The ENL teacher also meets with parents to discuss an ELL student's progress via written correspondence or parent meeting Additionally, our school invites ELL families to participate in birthday celebrations where families read their child's favorite book to the class- if parents do not speak English we have the child read her/his book, publishing parties, to act as chaperones 2018-19 CEP 49  on school field trips, volunteer at parent events with our PTA, and act as learning leaders and volunteer to supervise library time and lunch/recess activities. Parent Engagement events are September 13 and May 23. Parent Conferences are November 16 and March 15. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELLs are few and participate in all school programs with support when needed. Anderson is a gifted and talented school and within several months of attending school here students often reach proficiency in English. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jodi Hyde, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 334 The Anderson School School DBN: 03M334 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jodi Hyde Title Principal Nicole Chandonnet Assistant Principal Ana Crenovich Parent Coordinator N/A Diane Heath Alyssa Volpe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Heather Levine Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Gail Ridder School Counselor Ilene Altschul Mathew Angell N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M334 School Name: Andersonm= Superintendent: A.Alschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ana Crenovich Parent Coordinator no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the language preferences of PS 334's parent community for both written and oral communication data is reviewed by the ENL teacher and the Ass't principal. The data from the Home Language Report (RHLA), and the RPOB report on ATS is used to identify the home languages spoken. In addition to this review, our ENL teacher maintains a spreadsheet that indicates the parents home language and preferred language of communication that was gathered after reviewing Part III of the home language Identification Survey(HLIS). In addition, each classroom teacher sends home a translation necessity survey to prepare for Parent Teacher Conference needs. Emergency cards that are stored in the main office, are created in the preferred wriiten language and indicate the parents preferred contact language. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Although families of PS 334 speak Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Hebrew, French and Italian, the preferred lanuage for both written and oral communication is English. n/a n/a n/a English 100% English 100% n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A We do not have any languages in our school that represent at least 10% of the population of our school outside of the listed languages. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Newsletter Class News Letters Parent Coordinator Calender Parent Teacher Conferences NYS Testing Schedule Recess/Holiday Notifications N/A families prefer/requested information provided in English N/A families prefer/requested information provided in English School Newsletter: weekly Parent Coordinator Calendar: ongoing as updates are made/monthly 2018-19 CEP 54  Recess/Holiday Notifications: weekly in school newsletter class newsletters weekly parent teacher conferences 11/16/17 and 3/15/18 nys testing schedule Janurary N/A families prefer/requested information provided in English N/A families prefer/requested information provided in English N/A families prefer/requested information provided in English 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences PT Conferences: 11/16/17 and 3/15/18 Curriculum Night Phone conferences Individual parent meetings interpretation service(s)? Our families prefer/requested written and oral communication in English. If a family requests interpretation services in Spanish we will have our Assistant Principal(certified Spanish instructor) and/or Parent Coordiantor(native speaker) provide services. For all other languages we will provide NYCDOE translation services. Curriculum Night Phone conferences Individual Parent meetings 9/13/17 as needed/ongoing throughout school year ongoing Tuesdays throughout the school year 2:40-3:20pm see above comment see above comment see above comment 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school uses phone calls and mass-emails to communicate with families in the event of a school emergency. Emails will be translated by NYCDOE staff as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 55  During September professional development days, staff members receive training on services provided to ELL students and how to communicate with limited-English-proficient families by our LAP team. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All literature will be available in the main office for parents. The LAC/ Parent Coordinator will distribute key information/documents to LEP parents. The Welcome Poster is on display in the entrance of PS 84. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 334 will develop and utilize a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. At this time all ELL families and limited-English-families request written and oral communication in English. If a family requests a translated document or a translator present for oral communication our Parent Coordinator/LAC will request services from NYCDOE and translate inhouse if the language of choice is Spanish. These surveys will be reviewed and needed adjustments will be made to assist parents. 2018-19 CEP 56 
