2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M374 School Name: GRAMERCY ARTS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: SUSAN DICICCO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Gramercy Arts High School 02M374 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310200011374 9-12 40 Irving Place 212-253-7076 School Number (DBN): 212-253-8095 Fax: Susan DiCicco sdicicco@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Susan DiCicco Email Address: Teresa Sullivan/UFT DesigneeDanielle Meyer Charmaine Pinnock/Jennifer Batiashvilli Susan DiCicco TBD Samara Drayton, NA District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, New York 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue New York, NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Susan DiCicco Teresa Sullivan/Danielle Meyer (alt) Charmaine Pinnock TBD Erin Carr Amy Rojek *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Doigny Angela Bakash Samara Drayton Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/Student Member Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview We are committed to building a strong, purposeful scholarly and artistic community that works to achieve equity preparing all students to succeed in a college of their choice and beyond. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Gramercy Arts High School is a dual-mission high school with a community of over five-hundred scholars. Gramercy Arts is comprised of approximately 500 students who study Visual or Performing Arts. It is a diverse student body, 73% female with students commuting from all five boroughs. GA offers a balanced educational experience that includes Advanced Placement courses during all four years and a four-year studio arts major in either fine and visual arts or performing arts and theater. We are committed to Achieving Equity in our school building a strong and purposeful scholarly and artistic community that prepares all students to succeed in a college of their choice and beyond. Gramercy Arts High School actively partners with a range of community-based organizations and arts organizations to enrich students' learning opportunities and extend and expand instructional experiences. Two of our strategic partnership are with Cleary, Gotlieb, Steen, and Hamilton Law Firm and The McBurney YMCA. "Cleary" provides a partnership supporting SAT preparation, College readiness, Mock Trial, law internships, and host of Annual Arts show. YMCA provides lunch time leadership groups for students, after school activities, and in class curriculum for college readiness. We also have an ongoing relationship with Big Brothers-Big Sisters of New York City, which provides a cohort of our students with mentoring opportunities at SONY. Strength: Each studio has at least one educational partner (residency) each semester. For Visual and Fine Arts this includes The New Museum, School of Visual Arts, and FIT. For Theater this includes Ticket Development Fund, New York Theater Workshop, Manhattan Theater Club, and the Vineyard Theater. Challenge: Graduation rate and credit accumulation: Cohort T (Class of 2018) achieved 80% graduation rate in June 2018. We are striving for all future grading classes to achieve at least a 90% graduation rate with our goal as 90% for the June 2019 graduating class. Students will increase their credit accumulation through strategic programming and will increase their regents passing rate through targeted AIS and course auditing to achieve an overall graduation rate of 90% or higher by August 2019. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The population includes 19% students with disabilities and 3% ENL learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made many changes in our school community. We retained all of our teachers from June 2018 which is a major accomplishment and gives cohesiveness and a sense of stability. We have hired many teachers over the past 3 years and are beginning to see solid results in regents data, example: Global regents pass rate in 2017: 30% which I expected. This year, with teacher collaborating, meeting after school and I joining them in planning lessons, there was a sense of comradery and a true caring for the students in their 2018-19 CEP 10  classrooms, the results on the 2018 Global regents: 78%. In analyzing the data, we found that the students scored between a 3-5 on the essays, better results than the multiple choice. This proves that ALL students can learn and be successful. We have also changed the physical space to make students more comfortable, with less stress about getting to another part of the building in time for their next class. It also gives us the advantage to see our students more on the 7th floor and talk with them. We have created an inclusive school where students feel comfortable and safe. ELL and SWD are included in all general education classes, and are members of Student Government, YMCA, and other extra-curricular activities. Through the arts we celebrate cultural diversity among our students through performances, art-displays, (eg. Black History Month Celebration and the study of African-American Artists including August Wilson and Alvin Ailey). These strives have resulted in our earning a well-developing in creating a supportive environment in our January 2017 Quality Review. Our Key Focus:  Equity for ALL students and disrupting inequity.  Re-aligning curriculum to achieve Equity in curriculum, texts, activities and in staff.  Re-aligning curriculum to incorporate the CDOS Standards  Collaborative Problem Solving for students in need and their families in an effort to reduce suspensions and to teach skills  Teacher book studies on best practices and understanding their own truths around race and equity.  Increased parent participation due to hiring a full time parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M374 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 491 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 17 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 7 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 76.4% % Reduced Lunch 1.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 48.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 80% 77.3% 2.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 110 115 9 87.0% 5.9% 16.5% 35.8% 3.7% 5.9% 4 19% 5.8 N/A N/A 87% 81% 89.3% 17% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  An area of strength: Being accepted into the AP for All and the College Access for All initiatives. The continued implementation of Advanced Placement Courses which allows 9th grade through 12 th grade students to become college ready; the enrollment in these classes has grown from 100 in 2015-16 in five classes, 180 in 2016-17, 200 in 2017-18. Our goal for 2018-19 is to reach 250 students in 9 classes being offered, some with 2 sections of 34 students.  The professional learning focus in 2018-19: continue to be focused on improving teacher ratings using Danielson: Domain 1, components 1a and 1e, and pedagogy, Domain 3-components 3b, 3c, and 3d.  Priority needs: We are including the focus on Domain 2 Classroom Environment. This has been added so that we can observe, find evidence and give feedback focusing on the environment in the classroom through relationships, discussions focused on race and culture and trust in sharing views without judgement.  Expand our unit and lesson planning initiative to include rigorous texts that mirror our population's cultures and ethnicity, questions and debates that focus on racism and bias as well as portray strong and honorable connections to diversity resulting in more student engagement in reading, researching, debating and writing about different cultures through the lens of the subject.  Meet regularly with the content and grade teams and data teams to measure student achievement through out the year. Student surveys after each marking period to assess teacher relevance and classroom culture. Item analysis to drive work within the content team to analyze trends in multiple choice and essay writing.   Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100 percent of teachers’ will have observed lessons that include instructional practices drawing on strategies and techniques introduced in 20 professional learning sessions over the course of the school year, (as reflected in evaluators’ MOTP APPR notes and scores in domains 1 and 3). This year we will include Domain 2 to ensure the classes are a place of respect, where students feel safe, welcome and important. Where all cultures and issues of race breakdown inequity between students to students, teacher to students. Principal and Assistant Principal will observe classes, norm and discuss actionable and time-bound feedback together which will result in more consistent feedback and collaborative conversations with teachers. 2018-19 CEP 13  2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Full year Principal, AP, Data team, AP team, Model Teacher, Grade and Content teams. Guidance counselors Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will use data to ensure that all students including those in the lowest subgroups of the school are achieving at levels consistent with the school average in terms of course marks, credit accumulation, Regents scores (including college-readiness rates), and on-time four-year graduation rates. In Grade teams teachers will address the needs of the students in the lowest third in each grade. Each member of the team will be assigned a student to follow and create a relationship with during the year and monitor the student’s progress. We are now part of the programs: College Access for All and AP for All in an effort to improve teacher practices, rigorous instruction through professional learning, abundant resources and unit planning that will cross all classes, not only in AP classes. Professional learning: Whole-faculty professional learning: divided into 2 sections: Scheduled flipping bi-monthly on Mondays 1. Equity Training 2. PLC's: This PL will focus on topics that explicitly address instructional strategies and techniques around the following that teachers ranked as greatest-need areas in a survey in May 2018 and that were identified after examining 2017-18 MOTP observation data at the end of the school year: 2018-19 CEP 15  1. Planning for rigorous instruction that ensures students are learning new content and skills. 2. Co-Planning with ICT partners, IEP evaluations. 3. Attending additional outside PD on additional learning in specific subject 4. Increasing awareness of the inequities and racism as well as positive cultural and racial issues throughout the world through participation, depth of thinking, debate and conversations addressed in each unit. Lesson planning work will focus on:  How does the data inform our instructional decisions and what impact does it have on disrupting inequity?  What texts and deliberate questions will be planned in order to engage all students and build upon their own experiences or learning? Our professional learning is divided into two, switching every other week. During one Monday, teachers will focus on practices that are directly connected to instructional routines and practices that have been observed in classrooms. The content teams will re-align units and lessons to include texts that celebrate equity and include the CDOS standards. The other Monday will focus on Equity Training facilitated by the EQTeam. The principal and instructional team will visit teachers’ classes at least once a week in fast sessions of ten to fifteen minutes and use these visits to develop work that will be done in professional learning  Independent practice: Closure / Wrap-Up, Assessment, & Homework  How will you summarize the lesson? Will you invite students to share back what they did or learned during the practice? If so, what’s that look like? If not, then what instead?  What data will you have collected during and/or at the conclusion of the lesson to review in order to ascertain where students are in their development? 2018-19 CEP 16  What homework have you designed that functions to both demand further practice of the skill you just taught and deepen content knowledge (as opposed to introducing new material)?  What formative and relevant feedback are you giving on assignments for improvement as well as for an increased challenge? Professional Learning Communities: Problem of practice study group: All teachers 20 times between Sept. 2018 and June 2019 Principal, the Teacher leadership, Content teams and the Model Teacher. A group of teachers who are experiencing similar challenges in their teaching come together with a mutual problem and a commitment to create a plan of action. Action Research: Cycle of inquiry and often includes a group of educators that work together to develop and answer questions relating to instructional practice. Studying of student work: This will happen in Content and Grade teams. A group of teachers come together to study student work for specific purposes. Analysis of curricula across grades: A cross-functional team may review and provide feedback on curriculum maps of specific content areas across grade levels. Creating and analyzing portfolios Portfolios may include teacher notes on research, student work samples, video, lesson and unit plans, or samples of assessments which reflect the team’s implementation of new knowledge to improve pedagogy. Our students enter high school on average considerably below reading level. The only way for students to become better 9th grade teachers, All year Principal, AP, Model Teacher, 9th grade 2018-19 CEP 17  English, Social Studies teachers readers is to read more. Gramercy Arts will pilot an independent-reading initiative that asks students to read a certain number of books independently over the course of a marking period. This number will be set based on their STAR reading level and in conjunction with Accelerated Reader, a program tied to STAR Reading. Students will verify that they read their books in their entirety by taking a short comprehension quiz on their independent-reading book. Students will receive class credit for reaching their goals. The texts will be interesting to students and their experiences. In addition, 9th grade students were given Summer Assignments that included a book that all 9th graders will have read making conversations and discussions easier since they are all using the same vantage point. team, AP, English teachers, Backwards-designed unit plan expectations: All teachers 2018-19 Principal, AP, Model Teacher. Sept.4, Oct. 22, Nov. 26, Jan. 28, Mar. 18, May 6 Whole-faculty professional learning in 2015-16 was centered around the design and development of backwards-designed unit plans that use Understanding by Design as a framework. Teachers were responsible for submitting two complete UbD unit plans during the school year, and the units, performance tasks, and student work were work-shopped over the course of the school year. In 2017-18, teachers submitted six plans. In 2018-19, teachers will submit to the school's Google Drive six unit plans over the course of the year in the course they teach most frequently. The additional work for 18-19: to include relevant questions, issues, texts and references that reflect our student population (primarily Black and Latino students) in an effort for achieving equity in the classroom. 1. The principal standards addressed by the unit 2. Enduring Understandings 3. A minimum of 2 Essential Questions focused on race or culture 4. The skills and content taught in the unit, including key terms phrases, and expressions 5. The performance task description 6. A pacing calendar for students including 1. A description of task 2. The standards of measurement 3. Models and exemplars of final work 4. Materials to help students begin the task or overcome challenges Teachers will workshop their unit plans, performance tasks, and work from the performance tasks over the course of the school 2018-19 CEP 18 Principal, AP, Model Teacher, Teacher leaders, Content teams. year in their content teams, which will meet 28 times over the course of the 2018-19 school year. Aligning curricula across grades All Teachers All year We are continuing to work on our development of intra-grade (same-grade) course alignment of key ideas and concepts and language and vocabulary inthe English, Italian, and ENL department; the social studies department; arts department; science and math departments. The goal of this work: Continue to give students in a variety of settings more frequent and repeated exposure to the same or similar key ideas and concepts and sets of vocabulary and language, including regents language. This will result in an increase in mastery levels on regents exams. We want to focus on themes in the Big Ideas in units that have to do with world views and building empathy and understanding around equity and the impact of inequites throughout time. Grade 9: English 9 A (Reading & Debate/Speaking); English 9 B (Writing & Language); Global Year 1; Honors Global Year 1; Living Environment; Acting Year 1; Introduction to Studio Art 1; English as a New Language; Algebra year 1 of 2; Algebra; Geometry Grade 10: English 10; Global Year 2; AP World History Year 2; Italian Year 1; Algebra year 2 of 2; Geometry; Algebra 2; Environmental Science; ENL; Acting Year 2; Drawing Grade 11: English 11; AP English Language; ENL; U.S. History; AP United States History; Chemistry; Geometry; Algebra 2; ENL; year 3 arts electives Grade 12: English 12; AP English Literature; ENL; Participation in Government; Economics; AP Environmental Science; Physics; AP Statistics; Statistics; Pre-calculus; AP Psychology; ENL; year 4 arts electives 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  We will hold four parent meetings, organized by the new Parent Coordinator and Principal. and the AP of Instruction, over the course of the year focused on standards, our new independent reading initiative, building a great GPA for college readiness, and doing work at a high level.  We will provide family- and student-facing calendars that include key dates and milestones around academic class performance and college preparation. The student calendars will be given at the Town Halls on September 8; the family calendars will be given at parent meetings and at orientations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional learning or professional learning communities will take place every Monday; department team meetings take place every Monday afternoon; grade-team meeting take place every Tuesday afternoon.  Common Planning time is scheduled at least twice weekly so that teacher teams can develop instructional resources such as lessons and unit plans, and grading policies. Teachers will be involved in 6 cycles of peer-inter visitation with debrief and reflection during Monday PL.  Allocation of funds to support the yearly subscription to Skedula.  Use of Google Drive to share units; to collaborate; and to begin to develop intra-grade alignment of key vocabulary and terms, concepts, and ideas.  Allocation of funds and human resources will be used to recruit and enroll students in Advanced Placement Courses.  We added AP English Literature and the teacher attended the summer AP Institute at Fordham this summer for training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 75 percent of teachers’ observed lessons will include instructional practices that draw on strategies and techniques introduced during the professional learning sessions and professional learning community meetings over the course of the 2018-19 school year, as reflected in evaluators’ MOTP APPR notes and scores in Domain 1-components 1a and 1e and Domain 3-components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Evaluators’ MOTP APPR notes and scores in domain 3-components 3b, 3c, and 3d., and cycles of non-evaluative feedback that will use a standard document or card that will include low-inferences observations; conclusions drawn the observations; and a reflection of why these observations are particularly important or meaningful in the context of our community's instructional focus. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Quality Review 2016-2017 Indicator 1.4: Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults, was rated Well Developed: “Through the student government, they have led the formation and maintenance of a variety of clubs that help ensure that the school’s diverse student body is supported.” Indicator 3.4: Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations, was rated Proficient.   Based on the NYC School Survey Report 2017-2018, Supportive Environment was rated 79% positive response, Strong Families Community Ties 74% positive.  36% of students say that teachers notice when they are upset or having emotional difficulty.  65% of students agree or strongly agree that there is at least one adult they can confide in. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will attend two Town Hall meetings where common language and phrases that are built around PBIS to address community norms and norm violations will be presented to students; a student handbook will be revised and reviewed, and a PBIS Matrix of the Core Four Norms of the school will be developed for student to understand the expectations. The rating on the school survey for Supportive Environment will increase by 15% in positive ratings for the next survey. It will move from 79% positive response to at least 82% positive response. Answers having difficulty at 36% will move to 65%, one close adult: 65% will move to 80%. OORS reports will decrease by 40%. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Over the course of summer 2018, we will revise and align the Student handbooks to include Racial and Cultural Equity for All students. Will explain expectations for working out problems through collaborative problem solving Plan B. All students and teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, AP, student government student representatives, Deans, PBIS Team The critical content of the handbook will be reviewed with all students by year in the auditorium on second week of September during grade level Town Hall Meetings. All students will be asked to sign their names pledging to abide by the handbook norms. The Core 4 Norms will be posted in matrix of expectations for Classroom, Hallways, Cafeteria, and Gym spaces. Key norms and rules will be noted in daily announcements. Central to this effort will be the continued use of an intentional and specific shared vocabulary and set of non-verbal signals that faculty and staff members can use to describe and name norms, expectations, and rules, and name violations. Having shared vocabulary and signals allows adults to more efficiently and effectively remind students of norms and rules. In particular, using agreed-upon terms and signals will: 1. remind students that their misbehaviors or actions are a violation of a rule or norm that has its roots in the student handbook, which they have agreed to abide by; 2. reduce the possibility that a student might read a particular adult’s admonition as personal, since the term or signal is used universally to refer to any student regardless a particular student’s past history; 2018-19 CEP 22  3. be economical, allowing for quick, crisp, and hence more face-saving exchanges for students, which further reduces the possibility that students will react negatively to a request; and focus on students’ actions and behaviors, which can be corrected regardless of who the violator is. Daily Announcements: Administration, SGO leader, SGO students September 2018 to June 2019 Beginning on the first day of school, daily announcements will take place that allow all community members to be aware of events and activities that are taking place in the coming days and week. These announcements will be led by a student government team after the election process occurs in October. Empowerment group Principal, AP, student government student representatives, Deans, PBIS Team Administration, All teachers and students September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, AP, student government student representatives, Deans, PBIS Team, Boys empowerment group All community members will use a Google Drive doc to share and communicate information for the daily announcements. School Government Events and Inclusion of all students In October 2018 we will hold debates and elections for student government for grades 9th-12th: 1. 2. 3. Increase the participation rate in SGO events to 75% of the student population taking part in at least one event. This will be monitored by the Guidance Department using a log sheet. To include an increase in lowest third and under represented students participating. Increase student participation rate by 10% in peer Tutoring Increase student participate rate in Student Activities by 10%. 4. Expectations for attendance and reward for inclusion in SGO and PBIS events when attendance rate improves by 20% during a marking period. Targeted support of students through activity groups, at-risk counseling groups, teacher targeted support in class to support all students, and parent/teacher conferences. Administration, All teachers and students September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, AP, student government student representatives, Guidance counselorsDeans, PBIS Team 2018-19 CEP 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, we will hold six major parent-family events that include celebration of achievement of students and families and education for parents and families. This will be planned by our new Parent Coordinator, AP, Guidance counselors and Principal. We will include our CBO (YMCA), and the health center. Early intervention: Freshman families are invited to a dinner that addresses how best to support their child in meeting yearly benchmarks. Families are educated on high expectations for students to successfully earn yearly credit accumulation which leads to success in becoming college ready. Parents will understand the programs we offer students in support of their learning and needs. 60% of families will be using pupil path regularly to monitor their child’s progress. We have been accepted to the AP for All Campus program partnering with the campus schools. We have also been accepted into the College Access for All and plan to focus all students on college counseling for college readiness. Beginning in 9th grade, students and their families will be asked to attend to attend college trips to learn about education and the various options of the types of schools for their child resulting in an increase in credit accumulation and graduates attending college. We will reach out to families weekly by PupilPath, Remind and school website to keep families informed of the many events and activities taking place at the school. This will include PBIS events and trips, SGO events and Arts based events. This outreach will be completed by the Administration Team staring September 2018 and concluding in June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Allocation of time and per-session for teachers to meet in teams. Teachers will meet three times per week. ● Allocation of Per session for Equity Team/Teacher Training and resources and texts Tuesday Family Contact logged. To create relationships and trust with the families of their students. Divide Monday PL teacher time into bi-monthly Equity training by the Equity team and PLC, for teaching practices. ● Allocation of funds for PBIS incentive programs, Freshman family dinner and events. ● Allocation of funds for Texts that mirror student and family ethnicity and culture. Family curriculum night: parents can learn about credits and the education process for their child as well as find out about free support programs for families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the numbers of students who participated in an SGO,Clubs, After school Homework help and PBIS events will increase to over 150 students. We will record attendance at each event and identify if the student has attended prior events. There will be a decrease in the amount of OORs reports by 40%. This will be a result of building parent and family relationships. Working with our lowest third, SWD's in creating relationships with adults in the building that reach out to families as well. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SGO, PBIS participation rates. Attendance at Male Empowerment group meetings, Black and Latino male student group Afterschool Homework help (GRIP) is assessed weekly Afterschool Homework help attendees have a higher rate of attendance in return, better grades, credit accumulation, Attendance recorded at all events . AP class homework completion rate as reported by teachers. AP course grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The Quality Review from January 2016  The QR from March 13, 2014 indicator 1.2 states regarding an area of improvement that “there is not a core belief system around how the school believes students learn best in classrooms visited.” School survey: Students need to have relationships with teachers.  Priority: Teacher team time for collaboration in content, grade, equity and data teams.   That all students feel that Gramercy is a place for ALL students including various cultures and race.  Students and teachers share their own truth and story with each other to create a bond of acceptance and trust. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All teachers will have participated in lesson and unit planning that focus on instructional strategies and techniques addressed in domain 3-components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Including Domain 2: Classroom Culture. There will be an increase of 10% in MOTP scores in the areas of Domain 1, 3 and 2. Our content department teams will work together to examine and re-align curriculum to ensure that it is culturally responsive and reflects the lived experiences of our student and family communities. They will also work to integrate C-DOS standards in their units and lessons to ensure that relevant students are prepared for workplace and college success. Our grade teams will work with the school’s data team to monitor scholarship data to identify at-risk, academic probation students beginning in the first weeks of school. These students will be paired with select teachers who will track their progress, monitor their use of Homework Helper (Grip program) and interact with parents and family members at least once a week. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, AP Content Team leaders and Grade Team leaders who were trained in the protocol Peer inter-visitation: Teachers Weeks 5-6 Over the course of the school year, every teacher will visit at least six colleagues’ classrooms through the peer inter-visitation process. Colleagues will select whom they wish to visit for each cycle. A teacher does not have to reciprocate a visit. The focus on visits will be around strategies and techniques that teachers use to promote discussion and ask questions; engage learners; or assess learning. The six cycles of inter-visitation will occur during six two-week periods over the course of the year; one two-week period is scheduled each marking period. During each of these two-week periods: 1. the Visiting Teacher should meet with their Host Teacher, who will ask them to look for a particular strategy, feature, or aspect of the class that will be observed; 2. the Visiting Teacher should use a prep period to visit the colleague’s class (either for the entire period or for at least 20 minutes); and 3. the Visiting and Host Teachers will then meet to de-brief their visits during the first 40 minutes of Monday professional learning days, which have been set aside for this purpose. Week 10-11 Weeks 14-15 Weeks 22-23 Weeks 29-30 Weeks 36-37 2018-19 CEP 27  The protocol for the peer inter-visitation process will be reviewed during professional learning on Monday, September 24. Content teams: Teachers Teachers will use their content team meetings to present units, lesson, and tasks in a regular rotation, using protocols. Teams will focus on aspects of Danielson 1a and 1e, 3 and additionally Domain 2, class culture. Each teacher’s rotation will include, on different days, the presentation of their unit and the performance task, a lesson from the unit, and student work based on the performance task. All teachers will lead a rotation in their teams a minimum of four times during the school year. Grade teams: Teachers will use their grade team meetings to share and exchange instructional and intervention strategies. Focused on the Sub-group of lowest 3rd Black and Latino male students. . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, AP, Model Teacher, Content Team leaders 28 times on Mondays, Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Teachers 30 times on Mondays, Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, AP and Grade Team leaders . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher leaders will be expected to each present at 1 Parent Association Meeting during the school year. Teacher Leader worked will be shared and celebrated with the community via Pupilpath and the school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for teacher meetings throughout the day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  By February 2019, all teachers will have applied at least one instructional practice, question, activity, big idea, text, debate in their own lessons that include race and equity that was observed by their peers' and principal. during the first marking period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Submitted teacher lesson plans Submitted teacher reflection sheets Evidence from Observations on Advance from Domains 1, 3 and new focus of Domain 2 (classroom culture) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Quality Review 2016-2017 indicator 1.3 Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products= Rating Proficient.  May 6 , 2015 Quality Review indicates Proficient in 1.1, 2.2, and 4.2.  Based on the NYC School Survey Report 2015-2016, Supportive Environment was rated 59% positive response, Strong Families Community Ties 74% positive response.  36% of students say that teachers notice when they are upset or having emotional difficulty.  65% of students agree or strongly agree that there is at least one adult they can confide in. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, two teacher leaders will assume responsibility of leading 10 Professional Learning Opportunities on Monday. By June 2019, the school’s cabinet, comprised of the administration and content-team and grade-team leaders, equity and data teams will meet 20 times over the course of the year to plan curriculum, plan departmental work, and design, implement, and adjust school culture norms and systems with equity being the focus. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Cabinet meetings: Grade and content Leaders of the content and grade teams will meet with members of the administration as a cabinet every other week, for a total of 30 times over the school year. Equity team leaders Principal Fridays between Sept. 2018, and June 2019 The cabinet will provide updates on content and team meetings, provide a forum for exchanging information, and serve as a consultative body for setting school policy and making important decisions that affect the instruction, culture and equity within the school. The cabinet will guide school-wide work in developing and re-aligning curriculum using existing units and maps developed last year and this year by the staff. The cabinet will use Courageous Conversations, Lost at School and Changeable to help plan department-based professional learning. The cabinet will guide adjusting school culture norms and systems using PBIS, restorative circles, and the school’s newly written ladder of consequences. The Cabinet will focus on ICT models to support Student with Disabilities with specially designed instruction based on the student's IEP. The development of language objectives in all classes to address the needs of ELLs. Grade and content Equity team leaders Mondays and Tuesday Sept. 2018 -June 2019.. Principal The two Teacher Leaders will lead the Data Team and 9th grade team respectively. They will also facilitate a minimum of 10 sessions of full faculty Professional Learning during Monday PL. They will each lead one of the PLCs which are being rolled out for the 2018-2019 school year. The Math leader will spearhead a Video Learning Initiative for the Spring Term. Teacher Team Leaders All faculty will participate in PLCs training in Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) with administration to ensure that all students’ voices are heard in a fair and equitable setting, and that conflicts and disagreements can be resolved using de-escalation techniques that focus on building relationships and trust between teachers and students. This work will be facilitated . Teacher Team Leaders 10 times from September 2018 to June 2019 . . 2018-19 CEP 31 through text study of Lost at School and Changeable, The School Discipline Fix and Courageous Conversations along with other articles relevant to equity and race. The school will form an Equity Team of trained teachers that will facilitate this work along with the principal. This work will be scheduled every other Monday during PLC time. Content teams will be focusing on texts to purchase that are relevant to the lives of our students and their families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher leaders will be expected to present at 1 Parent Association Meeting during the school year. Teacher Leaders work will be shared and celebrated with the community via Pupilpath and the school website. SLT and the PA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Allocation of time for teacher teams to meet. Teachers meet three times per week. ● Allocation of $7500 to pay for one of the Teacher Leaders who is a Model Teacher. ● Allocation of funds to pay for instructional resources such as standards and equity aligned text books. ● Access to different data sources such as , Galaxy, Progress Reports, upcoming Quality Review and school survey Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the faculty will have been part of 5 Monday Professional Learning lead by Teacher Leaders. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Gramercy Arts Google Drive Cabinet Agenda PLC and Professional Learning Agenda and feedback from teachers Executive Cabinet Logs Cabinet work products that stem from problem solving sessions between teachers 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The utilization of Skedula as a communication tool with parents and students remains inconsistent among staff.  Many pieces of contact information for parents and families is not updated or is accurate; we don't have email addresses from many families of 11th and 12th graders. It is difficult for teachers and administrators to easily view instances of parent and family contact over time.   We continue to be plagued by a significant portion of our students who are chronically. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a ConstantContact and Pupilpath email blast will be sent weekly to families via email addresses that will be collected, organized, and maintained by the entire community in a tracker on the school’s Google Drive. There will be an 10% increase in the number of family recipients of these email blasts as compared to 2017-2018 school year. We will also regularly use Remind.com. Finally, student- and family-facing calendars will be produced and shared, and the student calendar will form the basis of the a custom-designed agenda that all students will be expected to use and maintain over the course of the school year. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly E-mail blast: Families Sept. 2018, and June 2019 APs, Parent Coordinator By June 2019, a ConstantContact and Pupilpath email blast will be sent weekly to families via email addresses that will be collected, organized, and maintained by the entire community in a tracker on the school’s Google Drive; teachers will use this document to track and update contact information after each outreach occurrence. Drive-based student information system: A Drive sheet will be created and shared with everyone. It will contain four tabs, one for each grade. The sheet will contain the most contemporary contact information, and each time outreach is made to a parent or family member, it will noted by the member making contact. School website: The school’s website will serve as a portal for staff and faculty, families, students, and prospective students and families. The site is built and will be maintained by a dedicated webmaster throughout the school year. It will include a portal to the school's GoogleDrive, shared Google calendar, and Google Classroom pages that will be created by teachers. Student GramercyHS.org accounts: Families,, Students Sept. 2018, and June 2019 Parent Coordinator Director of Technology Teachers, families, students Sept. 2018, and June 2019 AP of Instruction, Director of Technology, Webmaster Teachers, students Sept. 2018 AP of Instruction, Director of Technology 2018-19 CEP 35 All students will receive a GramercyHS.org account at the start of the school year. Teachers will then create Google Classroom sites and invite students to join using their GramercyHS.org accounts. Student and family-facing calendars: Families will all receive full-year calendars at the start of the year, and students will receive an agenda that is custom made to fit in their binder and that is built off the school calendar. These will be produced by Smooth in time to be distributed and discussed at the Town Halls on September 12, 2018. Teachers, families, students Sept. 2018 AP of Instruction Tracking chronically late to school students Students Sept. 2018 AP of Instruction Late students will check in using a Google Sheet starting in September 2018, allowing us to count the frequency with which students are chronically late. This is data that we have not had before. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. YMCA, Cleary Law Firm, the school-based health clinic Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement allocation NYSTL Software allocation ● Yearly subscription to Skedula and Pupilpath. ● Ongoing training on the use of Skedula for Administration, Teachers, Students, and Parents. ● Time identified in the school day to complete Parental Outreach. ● PBIS team meetings weekly to develop the expectations and lesson plans on the instruction of behavior in the classrooms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 36  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 12 blasts will have been sent to at least 150 working family and student email addresses on an ongoing, weekly basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Registered Pupilpath families Total # of email addresses for families in GoogleDrive Increased attendance to Parent Association Meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Three sections of 9th grade studentswill be targeted for two periods of Literacy classes titled English A and English B. English A will target the Speaking and Reading Modalities while English b Will TargetWriting and Listening. Second year of Algebra and Geometry common core focused on students in lowest 3 rd or have failed Regents Exam. Audit living environment to support successful completion of the learning standards and passing the Regent Exam. September 2018 creation of 2-year curriculum for two sections of 9th grade. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Class instruction, Small Group and one-to-one tutoring. Services are provided during the school day and on weekends. Whole Class Instruction Services are provided during the school day and on weekends Whole Class Instruction Services are provided during the school day and after school Tutoring program (Lunch and Learn) to target skills needed for the English Regents so that students can earn 75% or higher on the exam. Algebra CC 2 year course to allow students instruction over two years to earn 80% or higher on the exam. Living Environmentis delivered as a full-class service. Tutoring is delivered 45 minutes as a small group or large group setting depending on the needs of the students. 2018-19 CEP 38 Whole Class Instruction, Small Group or one-to-one tutoring Services are provided during the school day and after school Individual and Group Counseling Services are provided during the school day and after school. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Tutoring during lunch and after-school for students who failed Global History Regentsexam and US History Regentsexam with special focus on juniors and seniors. Skedula/Pupil Path targeting students with academic issues. Also at-risk counseling for students identified as having social, personal or behavior issues. Courses are taught for 45 minutes daily in full-class setting Tutoring is delivered 45 minutes as a small group or large group setting depending on the needs of the students. At-risk AIS counseling is provided individually to students who need to discuss academic, social and personal issues that act as barriers to school success. This is provided for 45 minutes one time per week. Groups for success counseling model to teach student to support self and others. These groups meet for 45 minutes one time per week. The School Psychologist provides special education evaluation referrals by Guidance Counselor or Administration. The social Worker in the health clinic provides individual counseling to students in need 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supply purchase, College trip tickets, PBIS activities, Theater Shows, Art gallery visits, Museum visits Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not required 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  Not required 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Weekly Professional Development on Literacy and Danielson Framework 1e, 3b, and 3d. Literacy Coach will meet with individual teachers on regular basis to address their instructional needs and provide in class support. Individual teacher improvement plans will be developed for all teachers who received developing or ineffective rating on their final MOTP report. Inter-visitations schedule will be established to allow teachers to observe each others' classes and provide critical feedback to their peers. Recruit and hire teachers from Teachers College and NYU. Provide in-school mentors to new teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will use their content team PLCs to present units, lesson, and tasks in a regular rotation, using protocols. Teams will focus on aspects of Danielson, domain 3. Each teacher’s rotation will include, on different days, the presentation of their unit and the performance task, a lesson from the unit, and student work based on the performance task. All teachers will engage in at least six cycles of peer inter-visitation during the school year. The visits will focus on aspects of Danielson 1e, 3b, or 3c before, during, and after their visits. Teachers will reflect on lessons learned from inter-visitations during conference days. Teachers will work together in 20 professional learning sessions on Mondays to focus on engagement, assessment, and questioning, using Teach Like a Champion and Making Thinking Visible as the backbone of the work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 42  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Professional Development Learning Opportunities Committee meets weekly to assess the needs of teachers to improve instruction and guide specific PD opportunities. MOSL Team will meet to determine the assessment selections for all teachers. The team will also engage in discussions about the selection of the local assessment to be administered to students. We will implement Ed performance in the spring term to collect evidence on student performance. The MOSL team has discussed how to utilize this test as a means to measure student progress in literacy. Performance series test will be introduced in the fall term as a baseline assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 43  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local $284,870 0 0 0 $3,012,433 X NA NA NA X Section NA NA NA Section 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 CEP 44  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Gramercy Arts High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Gramercy Arts High school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Gramercy Arts High School's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Gramercy Arts High school is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 49  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Gramercy Arts High School Borough Manhattan School Number 374 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Susan DiCicco Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joanna Clagnaz Teacher/Subject Area Amanda Beck, Sped Teacher/Subject Area Amy Rojek, Sped Related-Service Provider Catherine Polo Superintendent Vivian Orlen Assistant Principal Laura Hindelong Coach NA School Counselor Denise Ortiz Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? STAR Reading is administered in the first 2 months of the school year to all students. Incoming 9th grade students are given a school based reading and math formative assessment for class placement. This provides detailed analysis of student's weaknesses in literacy skills so that instruction can be differentiated to meet their needs and improve their skills. ELL teacher does detailed analysis of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL and Spanish Lab results to support student instructional needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? STAR Reading; class-based reading and math assessments; dedicated time for ENL teacher to review data and make recommendations for placement. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 53  The success of our ELL program is measured in two ways: # of students who move to a commanding level and pass the NYSESLAT and English Regents and also the # of students who go on to graduate high school in 4-years on- time. We have made great improvements in the success rate of our ELL students in the past three years. Three Former ELL students graduated in June 2018. The ELL teacher continues to put a large focus on Common Core aligned tasks such as argumentative writing and close readings. The Current Population of ELL is too small to qualify for AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? NA 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on our analysis of the results most students are on the threshold of commanding the language. Students need reinforcement in reading and writing skills.We have administered the NYSESLAT exam for the past 9 years and the results have indicated that writing is the modality that our students struggle with the most. The 9th and 10th graders are stronger overall in the Listening and Speaking areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NA Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We provide Heterogeneous free-standing ENL classes and Heterogeneous push-in content ENL classes) Free Standing ENL program allows for 2-continuous grade levels to be grouped together in one class.Integrated model allows for 9th through 12th grade homogeneous single grade groupings. This model is delivered in English classes for 9th-12th grade.. The integrated model provides for the TESOL to push into the content class to support the ELL students in their acquisition of reading and writing skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The program we have developed provides free-standing and integrated classes. 2018-19 CEP 54  Students who are at a Expanding level receive 90 minutes a week of ENL integrated instruction. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction and 90 minutes of free-standing ENL instruction. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of Free-standing ENL instruction and an addition 90 minutes of Integrated Instruction. Entering requires 270 minutes of ENL standalone and 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We offer the ENL model so content instruction is provided by a Sheltered English model. Students are programmed to get all the high school credits that they are entitled to and are given the appropriate ENL minutes of instruction. All classes are taught in 45 minute periods. Some arts classes meet for 90 minute block. ELL students receive native language support in the content areas through support by teachers offering instruction support in native language when needed, dictionary, and technological support (computers). These classes are offered to all ELL students. It is expected that all content areas align tasks and lessons to the common core learning standards. This includes all ENL classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ensuring that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language is the responsibility of ENL teacher, testing coordinator and administration. Teachers are informed at the beginning of the year who are the ELL students and what their testing needs are. For State exams the Testing Coordinator and Administration check that all students are provided their test accommodations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We have 1 SIFE student who received the appropriate minutes of ENL instruction and provided up to 90 minutes of tutoring weekly and content teachers focus on differentiation of instruction and scaffolding to help with the writing and reading in the different content areas. b. All ELL new comers students who have been in a US school for 3 years or less receive the appropriate number of ENL classes. Additionally, they are programmed for all the high school credits they would need to graduate. The students are given a dictionary to help the students understand the material in both their native language and English. Additionally, the teachers on staff who speak the student's Native Language are used as translators to help these new comers understand the content in all classes. Teachers use Universal Design for Learning(UDL) to create multiple entry points. Read-alouds are done to support access to grade level text for students to grapple and comprehend. c. Developing students are provided self-standing and inclusion ENL service. Teacher provide use of Dictionaries and documents in the student native language. Because we are an art school, teachers try to find opportunity to differentiation assessment based on interest. d. Long term ELLs will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL service and up to 45 minutes of tutoring to help with their area of need as per the most recent NYSESLAT test results. This tutoring will target their weaknesses and work to build up these skills which will allow them to move to Expanding and then Commanding level. Teacher utilize UDL to provide multiple entry points for meet the instructional needs of all ELLS. All ELLs are provided time and 1/2 on all exams and access to the exam in their Home Language (except for English Regents) and use of a bilingual glossary and bilingual reference table. e. Former ELLS will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL service and 45 minutes of tutoring to help with their identified ares of need as per the most recent NYSESLAT or NYS Regent Exam. All former ELL's within 2 years are provided time and 1/2 on all exams and access to the exam in their home Language (except for English Regents) and use of a bilingual glossary and bilingual reference table. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 55  The ELL students who have been identified as having a disability receive differentiated instruction as per their IEP. The goals of the IEP are reviewed and aligned with the curriculum for ENL. The students are provided accommodations such as extended time on tests, separate location or use of reader so that they can complete the content at or approaching grade level. Adapted texts, graphic novels, bilingual dictionaries, and graphic organizers are used to support. Students are grouped by home language to support L1 and L2. Technology such as laptops, iPads and apps are utilized to support translation. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We currently offer Integrated Co-teaching as the least restrictive environment for special education students. This program allows students to access the full General Education Curriculum while getting the support from a Special Education Teacher in content area classes. This same accommodation is provided in ENL classes although they are not done in an ICT format. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We support our ELL students in weekly group tutoring for up to 45 minutes. When possible this is accommodated in the students’ native language. We have on staff, teachers who can accommodate Spanish, Chinese and French which are the languages of current ELL and newly admitted students. Content area teachers use the data in Skedula to help work with the ELL students in the content area by scaffolding lessons and differentiating instruction. ELA- All 9th grade students will be targeted for English B Elective and Tutoring in preparation of the Regents will be offered in January and will target lowest 3rd students of 11th grade cohort to build on skills and knowledge to pass the English Regents with a college readiness score. Social Studies- Tutoring and target prep for students who have failed the Regent Exam or are taking the Exam in January or June. Math- Second year of Algebra and Geometry common core focused on students in lowest 3rd or have failed Regents Exam. Science- Two year living environment to support successful completion of the learning standards and passing the Regents Exam. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have added English B Curriculum to focus on writing skills in the 9th grade. We will also provide commanding 2-year and transitioning students who are in English 11th grade will be targeted for specific 90 minute tutoring block to help them pass the New York State Regent in English. Differentiation of instruction and writing and reading professional development. Use of Curriculum and test books which assist teachers in working with ELL students by providing ideas for differentiation and support. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. We are not discontinuing any programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are offered exposure to the same after school activities and are afforded the opportunity to participate in after-school programs which include: YMCA, PSAL sports, Anime Club, Poetry Club, Newsletter, National Honor Society, School Plays and Musicals, home-work club and Photography. ELL's participate in each of the listed clubs and are integrated into the school to be included in all activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 56  Each classroom is equipped with a Smart Board or projection screen which is used to support both Visual and Auditory Learners. This includes all ELL students in content area and ENL classes. Additionally, students can get access to lap-tops which provide them with an opportunity to work in their native language and increases their exposure to English Literature through the Internet. Content is made comprehensible by providing dictionaries for students, utilizing students’ knowledge in the classroom to assist each other, and performing activities encompassing listening, speaking, reading and writing. Materials include technology as well as standard texts in English. Subgroups consist of Entering and Expanding and also include groupings for Spanish, French/Creole, and Chinese. These materials are used equally for these subgroups to advance literacy skills in both the native language and English. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As an ENL program we offer students Bilingual glossaries for use in all their classes. We also provide use of the computer for interpretation and translation into home language and English. ELL students can be given copies of reading material in their native language and English. Science teachers can provide the reference tables in the students’ native language for Living Environment and Chemistry. Also we offer them the opportunity to take state tests in native language (science or history or Math). Pedagogues who speak the students native languages support these students through tutoring or during academic meetings with Guidance Counselors or Teachers. The list of all pedagogues who can provide this support is available with Laura Hindelong, Assistant Principal. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We provide all ELL students equal access to the curriculum they must complete in order to graduate within 4 years. Students are placed by grade and are afforded the opportunity to get all credits necessary for gradation. Resources such as text and primary and secondary documents are age appropriate in theme and content. This has allowed many ELL students to go on to become Commanding in English and also graduate high school in 4-years. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Each classroom is equipped with a Smart Board or projection screen which is used to support both Visual and Auditory Learners. This includes all ELL students in content area and ENL classes. Additionally, students can get access to lap-tops which provide them with an opportunity to work in their native language and increases their exposure to English Literature through the internet. Content is made comprehensible by providing dictionaries for students, utilizing students’ knowledge in the classroom to assist each other, and performing activities encompassing listening, speaking, reading and writing. Materials include technology as well as standard texts in English. Subgroups consist of Entering and Expanding and also include groupings for Spanish, French/Creole, and Chinese. These materials are used equally for these subgroups to advance literacy skills in both the native language and English. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We provide an orientation to all new students in early June and late August . At this orientation academics are explained and expectations for high school are explained. Families are given a tour of the school so that they have a better understanding of the spatial layout of the school. Translators are provided. Incoming students and families are given information about ELL services and are asked to attend Parent Association meetings and potlucks to welcome them into the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Italian language at the beginning level (1st Year) and are planning to offer year 2 in 2019-2020. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 57  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. As part of the Professional Development Plan at Gramercy Arts High School, an area of focus this school year will be on the 3rd Domain of Danielson Rubric which provides explicit instructional improvements to support ELL students. The Faculty will be provided Professional Development on September 4, 2018. Professional development takes place on Monday after school throughout the school year. 2. The ENL teacher will receive Common Core Learning Standard PD from the Dept of Education to include CCLS aligned tasks in class which include creation of argumentative essays citing evidence from the text and analyzing document based questions and interpreting graphics. The Assistant Principal Laura Hindelong will attend at least 1 PD through the DOE which involves BESIS, NYSESLAT or instructional practices. The Parent coordinator will attend PD thorough DOE and Advocate Groups so that she is up to date on best practices and compliance issues that relate to the ENL program. A school wide PD is offered each year which shares updates on pedagogical practices with ELL students and other stakeholders of how to best assist these students and families in being part of the school community. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. In addition to the PD that the administration offers the faculty on a yearly basis which informs of instruction practices for ELL students, they promote a college going culture which fully incorporates the ELL Students. Guidance Counselors will attend any Professional Development that is provided to help them best support student's transition into high school. the Guidance Counselor works directly with Senior ELL students to identify colleges, complete applications and if necessary complete SAT or TOEFL exams. Throughout the fall of Senior year, ELL students are specifically given tutoring to help with essay writing for college applications. Faculty is provided with list of Ell and Former ELL students. They can use this data to help in instruction. Also a list of all the teachers who can translate into the different languages of the ELLs is provided to help the new students get all information needed in native language. 4. All Faculty members will be afforded the opportunity to attend PD which will support their teaching of ELL students. Beginning in December, the PD Plan for Gramercy Arts supports instructional improvements in Domain 3 with a specific focus on Universal Design for Learning which supports differentiation of instruction. ELL students were a focus of this differentiation of instruction. Teacher meet weekly in content teams to review curriculum and address literacy issues for ELL students. Agenda and Minutes are kept for all meetings and teachers record their PD hours on the 175 Professional Hours Form from the State. 2018-19 CEP 58  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. There is a meeting scheduled for October to discuss the different program options. Additionally, the ENL teacher will meet individually with parents of ELL to discuss goals of the program on Parent/Teacher school night in early November and late March and individual appointments will be scheduled for January as the mid-point of the year. If the school can not meet the translation needs of the family we will call the Translation and interpretation Unit to provide these services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 3. All parents are included and invited to every event and activity the school holds. This includes but is not limited to Parent Association Meetings, School Leadership Team, Parent/Teacher Conferences and school concerts. Translators are made available either by staff members or the translator service unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susan DiCicco, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Gramercy Arts H.S. School DBN: 02m374 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susan DiCicco Title Principal Laura Hindelong Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Joanna Clagnaz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Amanda Beck, Sped Teacher/Subject Area Amy Rojek, Sped Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Denise Ortiz Vivian Orlen Maria Broughton Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Manhattan Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 9/5/18 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m374 School Name: Gramercy Arts High School Superintendent: M. Bradbury The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Data sources are reviewed to collect inforaiton to support ELL students. This includes ATS rpeorts, Blue cards, Parent Surveys, TEacher Surveys and Skedula informaiton. A document has been created listing all current and former ELl (2 year) indicating parent's home language. The process to identify a HLIS is that each new admit into the school who has not already attended a DOE school and therefore has not completed a Home Language Survey is given the survey to complete in either English or Native Language (current home languages are Spanish or French or Chinese). They are also given an oral interview in native language when required. The School Pupil Accounting Secretary contacts the following Pedagogues Mr. Christian Reynoso or Ms. Cathy Polo (Spanish) or Ms. Polo (French) or Mr. Firoozgan (Chinese) or Ms. Laratta (Italian) and they explain the home language identification survey in the home language and complete an interview.. After the family has reviewed document and completed the HLIS, the pedagogue reviews it and decides if child is potential ELL to administer NYSITELL if Sped Student the Language Proficiency Team will review to determine if NYSITELL should be administered. School Pupil Accounting Secretary inputs this information into ATS. Each month the list of students eligible for the NYSITEL is reviewed 2018-19 CEP 62  from ATS and students are tested within 10 days. The NYSITEL test is scanned into ATS which grades it to decide appropriate ELL level if necessary. Lab-R Spanish is administerd to students who are eligible for the NYSITELL and take it and their home language is Spanish. Once scores are input into ATS student is moved to appropriate ENL class if he/she was not already programmed for the appropriate amount of seat time. For NYSESLAT we review the RLAT each year and make sure students are appropriately placed in correct level ENL with the correct amount of instructional time in ENL. Review of the four modalities has indicated that students are at advanced levels in Reading and Writing. This information is given to ENL teacher. Teachers reviews ATS and Skedula info to determine Home Language to provide adequate communication with families through means set up in the school 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Faculty members are given list of ELL student with home lanaguge and shown how to review SESIS which both explicitly state the home langugage of students. Guidance Counselors support teachers during academic meetings with families providing Academic Guidance in the home language. The Parent Association meets 1 x time per month. At meetings, parents and teachers provide translation and interpretation as needed. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 63  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents sent home are translated by either a Faculty Member or by Translation Services so that all documents go out in a families home language. We anticipate 5 mailings a year to keep families informed on upcoming events at Gramercy Arts. We also utilize Skedula which will translate all correspondance into the home language. If Translation Services are requiered we will send the docuemtn out at least two weeks prior so that it is returned in a timely manner. We have two Guidance Counselors who speak Spanish and English and can provide oral interpretation for families. The Parent Coordinator obtains all forms in the languages of families at our school. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We currently have on faculty two Guidance Counselors who both speak Spanish and one teacher who speaks French. Between them they can provide appropriate oral interpretation services school wide to all families. If needed the Translation Unit is called upon for translation services if the school can not meet the needs internally. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As a campus school setting some of these will be met my our schoo individually, Welcome Poster, Parent's Bill of Rights, Parents Guide to Langugage Acess. The front desk houses Langugage ID guides available to all who walk into the school buidling. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During the individual conferences which we will schedule for Janaury, the ENL teacher will speak about the quality and availality of services to assess faimilies santification and what they believe are still needs for their children. Additionally, we will closely evlauate the parent survey results to deterine areas for improvement. 2018-19 CEP 65 
