2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M375 School Name: MOSAIC PREPARATORY ACADEMY Principal: LISETTE CAESAR 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Mosaic Preparatory Academy 04M375 310400010375 PK – 5 School Number (DBN): 141 East 111 th Street, New York City, NY 10029 212-722-3109 212-722-3165 Phone Number: Fax: Lisette Caesar lcaesar@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Lisette Caesar Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Evettelise Ware- Perez Brenda Cintron Evettelise Ware- Perez N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 04 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 th Street, Rm. 401, NY, NY 10029 AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Fl., New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Erica Alvarez-O'Connor EvetteliseWare-Perez Brenda Cintron N/A JuliannaOppenheimer N/A N/A Desiree Mallette FaigyAbraham Christina Hernandez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 5  Yvette Ramos TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide a diverse learning environment that challenges scholars intellectually through the development of leadership skills. We place the highest priority on building future leaders who demonstrate care for themselves and their community. We will develop leaders who meet high academic standards through a common core aligned curriculum that focuses on the needs of each learner to build their leadership capacity. We will support our scholars through academic enrichment and extracurricular supports. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Mosaic Preparatory Academy is an elementary school with approximately 352 students from Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 that comprises 34% African-Americans, 57% Hispanics, 3% White, and 6% Asian. Mosaic Preparatory Academy is New York City’s first Bucket Filling school. It aims to cultivate and sustain caring and positive-minded citizens. Mosaic Preparatory is also a College Preparatory School where scholars engage in rigorous instruction to prepare them for college and careers through its multi-faceted curriculum. In an effort to promote college and career readiness, students refer to all staff members as “professors” and each classroom has a college name evident on its door. Students are also made aware of the year they are expected to graduate from college. Hallways have been adorned with college pennants as well as college boards regarding college information. In addition, Mosaic Preparatory has adopted The Leader in Me curriculum, by Stephen R. Covey’s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People , which is a process for school-wide transformation designed to enhance students’ life skills and workforce readiness. The process also directly impacts staff effectiveness and engagement, and creates a safe and vibrant learning environment. There are purposeful and meaningful partnerships between Mosaic Preparatory Academy and its greater community that fosters the fruition of Mosaic’s mission. To name a few, they are: Asphalt green, Target, NY Cares, The Asthma Center, Cushman & Wakefield, Chelsea Piers, Department of Health, Wellness in Schools, Garden to Café, Grow To Learn, Girls Inc., Man Up!, and the NYCDOE’s Collaborative Action Research Project. In addition, Mosaic Preparatory Academy recognizes special student populations and their specific needs which now includes District 75 and its diverse learners. Under these learning conditions paraprofessionals as well as learning specialists play a role in the development of this population thereby addressing individual needs of the student. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In addition, the student body is made up of 13 % English Language Learners (ELL) and 35% special education. Boys account for 57% of the students enrolled and girls account for 43%. The average attendance rate for the school hovers around 91%. Mosaic's Student with Disabilities population have demonstrated a great need for small group instruction, a created curriculum that caters to the standards, as well as their individual academic needs. In regards to instruction, Mosaic prides itself with the ability to have an ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching) class on every grade level that integrates technology such as Promethean Boards, laptops, iPads and document camera, in all academic areas. In addition, Mosaic has a fully outfitted a computer lab and Target Library Media Center to further assist in meeting the students' academic needs. For example, our students participate in a math program titled First in Math which supports students in grade 4 and 5. MYOn is a reading program for enhancing and developing a love for reading for all students from Kindergarten to grade 5. At Mosaic there are a total of 41 ELL students. Home languages spoken include Spanish, French, Chinese, Arabic, and Bangla. This number includes 5 at the Emerging level, 27 at the Transitional/Expanding level, 9 at the Commanding level and 6 ELLs who have special needs. At Mosaic, ELLs are provided instructional support by the English as a New Language (ENL) program model. In this model ELL students are served according to their mandated instructional minutes based on their proficiency levels as established by the NYSITELL intake assessment and NYSESLAT scores. Much effort is made to ensure that teachers’ schedules reflect the needs of the ELL population. 2018-19 CEP 10  While Integrated instruction (Push-in) is the preferred model for the Freestanding ENL program, the wide distribution of ELLs across grades and classes makes Stand Alone instruction ( Pull-out) a necessary complement to support ELL academic success. In collaboration with the core classroom teacher, the ENL teacher differentiates instruction in the classroom for ELLs according to their proficiency levels. The academic rigor for each level increases, as the proficiency levels increase. Appropriately leveled materials for learning are gathered by the ENL teacher/coordinator to be utilized in instruction. Additionally, the ENL teacher “pulls out” students from classrooms as necessary in order to give students additional individual and/or small group language acquisition and content support. Mosaic, as necessary, also includes ELL students in AIS interventions, as well as all after school enrichment programs. Additionally, our ELL population is provided with a variety of technological devices to build their English language capacity and content knowledge in all subject areas. NEEDS SPECIFIC DATA 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Moving into its tenth year, Mosaic has particular strengths and accomplishments worth celebrating. First there is a significant decrease in the number of incidents recorded in the Online Occurrence Reporting System. Mosaic supports all learners through the established Positive Behavior/Intervention System (PBIS) model. In addition, 85% of the entire staff is trained in TCIS (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention System) which has helped to significantly decreases the amount of behavioral incidents in and out of the classroom. The Framework for Great Schools Report indicates a xyz point increase in Teacher Collaboration. Teachers have cultivated and embraced the idea and importance of teacher collaboration thereby honing a professional learning community. Teacher teams continue to use Charlotte Danielson's teaching framework to support and guide teacher practice and enhance instruction across the grade levels as evidenced during teacher observations and engaged feedback sessions. We will continue to reflect on our practices as well as fortify a collaborative approach to impact student achievement through intra-visitations with other schools within our district. Mosaic has made many strides in making its targets as identified on the Framework for Great Schools Report. Most significantly in the area of rigorous instruction as demonstrated by an increase of XYZ point increase on the Report. Mosaic has worked with various consultants in both ELA and math to help build teacher capacity and provide engaging and rigorous instruction. School data as well as city data show that in all grades and classes there is an increase in the number of proficient scholars. Most notably, Mosaic has reduced its level 1's by more than 50% thereby increasing its levels 2s, 3s, and 4s students to greater proficient points. Work will continue in this area. 2018-19 CEP 11  Specifically, strengthen our ability to support individual and small groups of students in the classroom based on their specific needs. While there are aspects of Mosaic that function well, Mosaic has some challenges. Maintaining strong community ties continues to be a struggle. Parent participation during Parent Association meetings remain at low numbers. There are still 60% of the parents who do not exhibit a strong partnership with the school. This will also be an area of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M375 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 333 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 38 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 3 School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.2% % Reduced Lunch 9.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.6% 49.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 54 53 89.6% 1.8% 32.7% 41.7% 2.4% 4.2% 2 10% 7 24.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Mosaic continues to modify its rigorous curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Through the use of supports and scaffolds student work products and discussions continue to reflect high levels of thinking and participation, yet evidence of students understanding are not reflected in school based assessments like Enage New York and Teacher's College Writing performance tasks. The 2017-2018 quality review states that across classrooms, teaching strategies including questioning and scaffolds should provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Teachers must provide better instructional scaffolds for students with disabilities, ENL learners, and and especially targeting students in alternative housing. Teachers must continue to incorporate various technological tools to ensure that students have access to the content regularly. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of students in K-5 will demonstrate proficiency (Level 3 and 4) as per the Engage NY math modules end of unit tasks. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continued (differentiated) professional development in Number Talks, the 5 E's (Engage, Explore, Explain, Elaborate, and Evaluate) and reinforce strategies learned via the Algebra for All initiative to enhance professional practice in math on a weekly basis. The team will strengthen collaborative practices with math coaches from Metamorphosis group. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018– June 2019 Assistant Principal, Algebra for All math team Classroom Teachers, Gr. K-5 which includes ELLs and students with disabilities. The math team will be used to support grade level PLC's in math with a focus on looking at student work, teacher planning and instructional practices. Grade Leaders, Gr. K-5 September 2018– June 2019 Leadership, Math teams Teachers will engage in inter-visitation with in the grade and provide immediate actionable feedback to colleagues to support and strengthen practice. Substitutes may be used to support this structure. Students will participate in daily self-reflective and self-assessment practices through the implementation of Number Talks from K-5 on a daily basis. The K - 5 includes ELLs and students with disabilities. Additional supports will include but are not limited to diagrams, pictures, number lines, cuisenaire rods, small group instruction and the attention to the 8 mathematical practices. Data meetings among the grade level PLC's with math team members will be used to examine student performance. They will take place after mid and end of module assessments. Teachers also engage in looking at student work protocols during common planning periods once a week via the Tuning Protocol Model. School Leaders will conduct cycles of observations on a bi-monthly basis in math focused specifically in 3b. Students in Gr. K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Grade Leaders, Gr. K-5 All grades K-5, parents on Tuesday September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal, Teachers with Parents All grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Principal,and Asst. Principal. 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through monthly parental workshops in mathematics and literacy, the parent coordinator and assistant principal will inform parents of the instructional shifts within the common core learning standards for mathematics and literacy. Topics may include but are not limited to math talk at home, math games and how to support math skills and fluency. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  School leaders will ensure common planning time for teachers to collaborate 1x a week for 50 minutes  School leaders will have professional development during the school day 4x a month at 50 minutes.  School leaders will contract math consultant from Metamorphosis. Per session/per diem will be set aside to ensure that teachers are given the opportunity to participate. School leaders will also have professional learning opportunities after school and once per month for teachers; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of students will demonstrate proficiency (level 3 or 4) on the mid-year benchmark assessment provided by Engage NY. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument to be utilized for the February progress monitoring, aligned to the benchmark goal are the mid chapter module assessments and the end of module assessments. Engage NY has a built in midyear assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2017-2018 school year, Mosaic witnessed some improvement with the 5th graders in the areas of social responsibility throughout the school day as evidenced by teacher feedback, 4R partnership reflection meeting and school staff. However based on the number of incidents occurring inside the classrooms zzz% , during instructional time as identified by OORS data. This encompasses YYY% of the total number of incidents during the 2017-2018 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By March 2019, there will be a 50% decline in the number of incidents as per the Online Occurrence Reporting System from XXX to YYY. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Frequent cycles of professional learning opportunities by school counselors and selected staff members focused on the use of Restorative Circles and Class Dojo points. K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselors and selected staff Select a core group of five 5th graders to participate in conflict resolution and peer mediation to support with minimizing occurrences during instruction, lunch and recess. 5th graders, Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselors 5th Grade Teachers Create a crisis intervention team to address individual students that demonstrate a severe home hardship/personal struggle. All Students, Parents, 2018-2019 Principal and Assistant Principal, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, CBO N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Parent Engagement Tuesdays the school will create the bridge to support families and their children. Once a month, the guidance and support team will meet with families from cohorts of grades to discuss various topics that may include, but are not limited to community support services, understanding your child's IEP, healthy eating and healthy living, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session for PBIS and Crisis/Intervention Team to plan for parent meetings. Per-diem substitutes as needed to relieve teacher mentors for student conflict resolution group Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, Mosaic will reduce classroom infractions by 20% as per OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data will be the leading indicator used to monitor this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on end of year data regarding performance tasks, Mosaic has reduced students performing at level 1 by 40% and increased students moving into proficiency by 30%. Students with special needs however are not progressing at the same rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 35% of all students will achieve proficiency in reading foundational standards, as assessed and monitored on the school's reading foundational benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff will be trained in the utilization of a comprehensive lesson plan (1a/1e) template that includes attention to the RF standards All Staff 2018-2019 Literacy Consultant Administration Intervention Specialists All Staff 2018-2019 Literacy Committee Staff will work collaboratively to apply the RF standards to interdisciplinary units of study SWDs will receive intensive intervention in Reading Recipe by SETTs teachers ENLs will receive additional support from ENL teacher and student teachers from Hunter College Students in level 1 will receive intensive intervention provided by their teacher or cluster teacher Students in level 2 in grade 1 will receive intensive intervention in Reading Rescue Staff will be trained in interventions that are Orton-Gillingham based Staff will be trained in various topics around the Reading Foundation standards to support focused small group instructions including: strategies that align to specific grade levels Incorporating RF standards in all content areas    what does it look like and sound like in the classroom  modeling of practice 2018-19 CEP 21  inter-visitations Conduct and facilitate parent workshop around (RF) CCLS Parents 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator during Parent Engagement Tuesdays once a month. Parent Breakfast, principal shares a strategy and/or resource with the attendees. Promote Parent Academy by district office and classroom teachers Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Student-Led Conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays families will collaborate with teachers on the various strategies that they themselves can utilize at home to support student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule RTI Per-Diem pay for Teachers providing services during their preps Develop a schedule for paraprofessional support RTI every Monday and Tuesday during professional learning times as well as selected classroom times based on their schedule. Academic intervention will also take place every Saturday from October 2018 – May 2019 by classroom teachers hired for Saturday Academy/tutoring Programs to be used this year for intervention by staff are: Recipe for Reading, Sounds in Motion, Phonics Blast, Wordly Wise, Reading Rescue, Compass Learning and MyOn. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  By March 2019, all students will have increased 2 F & P reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinelle Leveled Reading Assessment and the Gates-McGinite. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders frequently communicate with the staff through various means including face to face meetings, emails, webinars, etc. to ensure that the school’s vision and instructional focus is always at the forefront. In addition, the administrators conduct frequent cycles of observations with timely feedback to all staff. The school administrators conduct frequent data talks to ensure rigorous instruction, analysis of data and to facilitate the improvement of student achievement as evidenced by the Advance data of 2018. The school recognizes the need to model for teachers how to analyze their goals frequently based on observation data and other data sources. The school further recognizes that sharing best practices among staff helps to build the capacity of staff members and ensure students reach proficiency levels. As a problem of practice, it has been observed that students are not moving to proficiency in writing at the same rate as other disciplines. As a result this year the leadership will work to support and monitor structures focused on looking at student work and reflection on the work of the professional learning communities grades K-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will ensure all staff will engage in at least 3 cycles of inquiry to examine the problem of practice in writing (focus writing/stamina) in their grade as measured by meeting notes, reflective documents, student and teacher work products. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be engaged in various monthly meetings around looking at student work in all disciplines using the Tuning Protocol. Teachers will work with Literacy Consultant on PD Mondays to enhance their understanding of the writing process looking at writing data and specific tools and strategies that support all students specifically ENL's and SWD's. All Staff 2018-2019 Staff developers, administrators All Staff Every other Tuesday Teachers, Parent Coordinator Teachers will engage in a cycle of professional development All Staff around effective practices for Teacher Teams based on the work of Harvad and Data Wise. Weekly based on Grade Meetings Schedule Administrators/Grade Leaders Teachers will engage in cycles of intervisitations to support teacher practice and discussion and engagement. They will meet every six weeks to review data from writing samples. Looking at student work protocols will help teachers to strategically implement next steps in their instructional practice and student achievement for writing. All Staff Every six to 8 weeks throughout October 2018 and June 2019 All staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Data reflections and outcomes will be shared with families 3x this year to highlight schoolwide progress and next steps. Additionally, we will plan to determine how parents can support student achievement for their children at home. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers have Tuesday dedicated time to engage families in academic conversations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will meet with teachers for two rounds of data cycles. By February of 2019, 50% of the teaching staff will have engaged in professional development around Data Wise. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers upload their data teams meeting forms into the school's Google Drive weekly. The teachers are given a school wide form to complete on their progress of looking at student work. The administrators provide ongoing feedback in the Google system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school hosts various opportunities for parents to engage in activities such as one to one meetings, workshops, seminars and Student-Led Conferences to discuss their child’s achievement and school wide goals. Data Source: Attendance Sheets 2017-2018; Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 The school does recognize the need for consistency with it's plans, goals and ideas as it relates to parent engagement. This particular need arrived from a team discussion on parent engagement as well as strong family and community ties. Furthermore, the school has identified a need for a mental health partnership for students and parents. Partnerships will also include music, choir and instruments. The LES also indicated a need for a greater welcoming environment for parents. Although during the Student-Led Conferences, Meet the Teacher Events and Family BBQs, we notice a large percentage of parent participation, there is minimal to none at the PA meetings monthly and Tuesdays Parent Engagement Meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase parent/guardian involvement by 50% as measured through collected sign-in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents 2018-2019 School Staff Parents 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Parents 2018-2019 Administrator, Parent Coordinator Parents 2018-2019 Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school plans to host monthly assemblies. Before each assembly the principal or principals' designee will facilitate a workshop around goals, student achievement or resources for families. Assemblies within the school community will include students with disabilities and English language Learners. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate two (2) workshops monthly based on school wide needs. In addition to the Parent Coordinator's two workshops a month, a school administrator will facilitate a monthly math workshop in collaboration with the art teacher to increase parent turnout. Parent workshops on how to read and interpret IEPs for students with disabilities. strategies to support English Language Learners will be facilitated by Mr. Gonzalez and the Parent Coordinator. In late September/early October 2019 the school will send each parent a Needs Assessment in September to identify areas of need and concerns to be addressed at meetings throughout the year. Parent Engagement Tuesdays will be facilitated for parents of students identified as "at risk." Sessions will be differentiated, timely and appropriate. Mosaic will also implement Family Math Night and to provide guidance for parent who need supports for students in math at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator will be utilized as a resource and a catalyst to assist the school’s administrators and teachers in identifying needs of parents and scheduling meetings with staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The schools will examine sign in sheet data on a monthly basis and reflect to make necessary adjustments in order to augment future levels of participation. The school will increase parent participation by 25% from September to February 2019 and from February to June parent involvement will increase by 50%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will monitor parent involvement using sign-in sheets and surveys from September 2018 to February 2019 and compare/ contrast the data with parent attendance from September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) RTI Interventions Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA Baseline, Benchmark Assessments, F&P Levels Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Math Baseline, Benchmark Assessments Unit Tests RTI Interventions Guided Practice Baseline, Interim Assessments Teacher Referrals and Parent Referrals for Counseling Guided Practice Group & Individual Counseling Sessions will also be provided by the CBOvia referrals and by the CBO'ssocial workers. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one to one AIS, Saturday Academy tutoring. The CBOwill also provide additional tutoring in reading and homework help for all students participating in the Harlem RBIProgram. Small group, one to one AIS, Saturday Academy tutoring. Small group, one to one AIS, Saturday Academy tutoring. Small group instruction Group & Individual Services When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 2018-2019: during professional periods (the 6th period) by all teachers 2018-2019: 25 Saturdays, before and after school 2018-2019: 7 Saturdays, before and after school During the school day 2018-2019 During the school day as needed 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Mosaic Preparatory Academy has approximately XYZ% students in Temporary Housing October 2018. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students in temporary housing receive all school supplies (book bags, notebooks, pencils, etc. as well as a uniform. All students in temporary housing are frequently checked in on by a team at Mosaic comprised of the Parent Coordinator, Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Principal and Teachers. Attendance, social and emotional wellness and academic standing are monitored frequently. Services focused in this area will be provided as needed to scholars identified by social workers and guidance counselors. Parent outreach is made by the Parent Coordinator to identify other needs of the family. Students are given meals to take home for dinner and snacks for the entire family daily. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The administration works to build leadership capacity with the staff and provides leadership opportunities. The staff works together on sharing best practices in all of the academic areas. Teachers also attend professional learning session through our UFT Teacher Center. The school also supports teachers via the various team structures established at the school. For example, the data wise team, data team etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school has an established Professional Learning Team that evaluates the opportunities offered every six weeks through Survey Monkey and the analysis of weekly feedback sheets from the attendees. The school has contracted a literacy coach and math coach. In addition, professional learning activities are all rooted in research based programs and strategies. We also have a new UFT Teacher Center that provides professional development for all staff members, including paraprofessionals to help support the common core standards. The school also participates in intra - visitations to enhance and share best practices for all staff members. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A staggered start schedule will be established to support the initial transition. Social workers and counselors will be available to support students still struggling to transition. If needed, plans will be developed with the families of individual students to support transitions. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has several teams to build leadership capacity and decision making processes. Mosaic maintains a MOSL team that meets with administration to ensure best practices are in place for both educators and students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X n/a n/a n/a n/a TBD TBD n/a Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal n/a TBD TBD TBD 2018-19 CEP 34  Tax Levy (FSF) Local TBD n/a TBDT 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 35  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mosaic Preparatory Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Mosaic Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 38  · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Day events; · establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. · Informing parents of the opportunity to discuss CBO information, student progress and support with teachers and staff during parent engagement times on Tuesdays after school. · Parents will be provided parent handbook that will include who to call at the school if they need anything, local community offices, and helpful websites on how to support the students at home. 2018-19 CEP 39 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mosaic Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum · using academic learning time efficiently; · respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships · conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 40  · providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff · ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: · creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); · sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; · supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 41  · ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities · monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; · ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; · check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; · read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); · set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; · promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; · encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; · volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; · participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; · communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; · respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; · become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; · take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; · share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  Student Responsibilities: · attend school regularly and arrive on time; · complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; · follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; · show respect for myself, other people and property; · try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; · always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 4 School Name Mosaic Preparatory Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 375 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisette Caesar Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nelson Gonzalez Teacher/Subject Area Darryl Browne Teacher/Subject Area Common Branches Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Jorge Moore Coach type here School Counselor Jeff Rabinowitz Parent Sonya Duenas Parent Coordinator Sonyha Duenas Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 319 2018-19 CEP 44 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The NYSITELL scores in English and Lab-R scores in Spanish, NYSESLAT modality reports, ELA Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell running records, and Curriculum-based-measurements (CBM's) are among the assessments administered throughout the year. Data from these assessments and CBM's are analyzed by the Mosaic’s Inquiry team, and instructional implications are made clear to all teachers of ELLs. Teachers also use the information from these assessments to form their instructional groups (i.e., guided reading groups, writing intervention groups, ENL pull-out groups, etc.) These and other assessments reveal a weakness across all grades in reading comprehension and writing. This finding as well as related and similar findings for the gen-ed population has resulted in a school wide effort led by inquiry teams and the school leadership to project an intensive instructional focus in these two areas for the coming school year with related sight word and academic language work.Specifically Lab-R and NYSESLAT data reveals that we have 4 Entering, 3 Emerging, 10 Transitioning and 12 Expanding students in English language proficiency. Fountas and Pinnell data available through December indicate that ELLs in grades 2, 3, 4, and 5 have made strong gains in reading levels as compared to their gen-ed peers, but a some are still reading below 2018-19 CEP 45  grade level. Scholar's levels of literacy in the native language are taken into consideration so that gen-ed teachers as well as the ENL teacher can tailor their instruction to meet the needs of their ELLs. The Spanish Language Acquisition Battery (LAB) scores as well as the NYSESLAT scores are used by the ENL coordinator and classroom teachers to determine placement in appropriately-leveled instructional groups. These assessments are also used as a tool to identify native language skills that can be utilized as a strengths that can be transferred to support English language acquisition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? . The ENL teachers participates at least once a month in teacher grade level meetings to report on the progress of ELL students in the different grade levels and to initiate discussions with the core classroom teachers on what are the next steps to implement to support ELL students success with language and content in the classroom. Additionally, during integrated work there is a daily constant real time interaction and feedback between the ENL and classroom teacher, in order to best support ELL students during small and independent group work after mini lessons in the core classroom. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The use of the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, NYSESLAT, Ready-Gen, ELA assessments, ELL periodic assessments, as well as teacher created formative assessments are the components used to measure ELL growth in English and in content areas. The speaking and listening, and reading and writing components as reported in NYSESLAT scores are a very important source of data that all teachers refer to when assessing the progress of ELL students. The expectations are that Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Proficient ELLs will make steady progress especially in the more difficult areas of reading and writing and move forward towards native like proficiency in a timely manner within one to three years.. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? . The NYSESLAT modality scores and overall proficiency levels of ELL students are reviewed by the principal, ENL teacher, parent co-ordinator, and special education liason which make up our ELL committee and this information is communicated to classroom teachers at the beginning of the school year both in written form and reported in grade level meetings to teachers of ELLs by the ENL teacher. During these initial meetings and subsequent meeting throughout the year the ENL and classroom teachers collaborate and review relevant data to decide what next steps need to be taken to insure ELL success in both language acquisition and content area. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The purpose of RtI in relation to ELLs is to provide students with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs, as demonstrated by performance on periodically administered assessments. Mosaic Preparatory Academy follows the protocol called for by RtI which insures that ELL's receive strong core classroom instruction at the Tier I level with the mandated ENL support that will enable that student to succeed. If after a period of time corroborated by data (NYSESLAT, F&P's, Periodic assessments, formative assessments) a student needs additional support--the core classroom teacher, together with the school leadership team will propose moving to Tier 2 instruction or a "double dose" of support involving small group settings, extra attention, and activities related to content and English language support. Finally, if the data suggests additional support is needed then Tier 3 instructional support involving intensive and individualized 1:1 instruction will be utilized to help ELLs achieve success. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 46  Our ELL committee makes use of the integrated data made available by the EDAT tool combining student information from the RESI (all student data), RNMR (NYSESLAT scores and modality breakdowns), and RLAT (NYSESLAT scores from the last three years), to identify ELL students that are achieving success as well as those who are struggling. We then use this information to provide the scaffolds necessary to further the academic growth of our high performing ELLs as well as provide additional scaffolds for those ELLs that are struggling. When reviewing scholar data across the four language modalities, we have found that, regardless of proficiency or grade level, listening and speaking continue to be our scholars’ strengths. Meanwhile, the data indicate that reading and writing continue to be the greatest challenges or identified areas of weakness for all scholars across proficiency levels and grades. While a small number of scholars scored proficient in reading and writing, the majority of our ELL students still need these modalities to be targeted and strengthened. Given this data, the school leadership, teacher teams, and the ENL program is committed to place more emphasis on teaching scholars to be critical readers and skilled, creative writers which are key skills projected in the revised Common Core aligned NYSESLAT as well as the NYSITELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher regularly meets with grade level teacher teams to communicate the relevant data from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. After reviewing this data, and looking at the individual listening, speaking, reading, and writing scores and overall language proficiency levels, as well as Spanish Lab results, this information is utilized to decide placement in student differentiated groups, targeted instruction during both integrated and stand alone support, as well as whatever other related services may be necessary. Additionally, classroom teachers administer the Fountas and Pinnell running records on a monthly schedule and together with the ENL teacher carefully track the reading level progress of ELL students. This data together with information gleaned from shared and guided reading in the core classroom, as well as conferencing with students determine next steps to support ELL academic success. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 47  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Scholars in the free standing ENL program at Mosaic receive all instruction in English through "integrated" and "stand alone" instruction that employs specific ENL methodologies and native language support (e.g., native language dictionaries, glossaries, translations when necessary, native language literature, peer tutoring, etc.). The free standing ENL program utilizes flexible mixed ability groupings that change according to the evolving strengths of students in the four modalities: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The ENL teacher at Mosaic provides the mandated minutes for ENL services as determined by scholars’ proficiency levels of language acquisition: 360 minutes for Entering and Emerging students and 180 minutes for Transitioning and Expanding scholars. Students who are at the Commanding level also receive ENL support (90minutes) for an additional two years per CR Part 154. The ENL teacher utilizes the integrated model to work with ELL students in the core classrooms and incorporates ENL strategies to support the core classroom teacher during his/her content area instruction. Due to the fact that ELLs are enrolled in 10 different classes across 6 different grades, the ENL teacher also utilizes the "stand alone" model to organize and work with small groups of ELLs outside of the classroom setting-- according to their language proficiency level and/or linguistic needs so as to meet the mandated instructional time necessary to support these students. In the freestanding ENL program at Mosaic that utilizes both "integrated" and "stand alone" ENL support, English literacy skills are taught using ENL and related ELA methodologies, while content areas (math, science, social studies,etc.) are taught in English using ENL strategies and related SDAIE(Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English) protocols to support access to vocabulary and content. Peer translators are utilized for language support, as well as support through the use of technology (e.g., Google Translate; Wordlywise; Flocabulary; and other IPAD applications) that promote English speaking, listening, reading, and writing, etc.). The ENL teacher is the only individual with an ENL license at Mosaic. When the ENL teacher is not available to provide in-class support, the mainstream classroom teachers are responsible for infusing their content-based instruction with ENL strategies previously modeled at ELL related professional development and discussed with the ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? English Language Learners are served according to their mandated instructional minutes. In the ENL program, Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL services ( 8 periods per week). 180 minutes are provided as integrated support in the core classroom during which the ENL teacher using ENL methodologies as necessary such as repetition, recasting, visuals, text summaries, etc., works with ELL students to support their understanding of classroom content and to carry out classroom tasks in differentiated groups that include peer support 2018-19 CEP 48  to insure their success. An additional 180 minutes of stand alone instruction is provided for these students with the focus on reinforcing English language skills, classroom content, and related vocabulary through phonemic and phonological awareness activities, echo, shared, and guided reading activities, as well as writing activities scaffolded with visuals and graphic organizers such as Thinkiing Maps to support the practice of the writing process and related skills. Transitional and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL support ( 4 periods per week). in the core classroom, the ENL teacher uses ENL methodologies as necessary such as repetition, recasting, visuals, summaries, etc., and works with ELL students to support their understanding of classroom content and to carry out classroom tasks in differentiated groups. This includes support from peers with similar home language skills that can clarify tasks and model quality work. Additionally, related writing activities are scaffolded with visuals and Thinkiing Maps organizers to support the practice of the writing process and related skills. Students who are at the Commanding level receive ENL support (2 periods per week) for an additional two years. They receive integrated support with a greater focus on using ENL methodologies to scaffold success in content areas in the core classroom, such as Math, and ELA and developing advanced English literacy skills through work with core classroom content. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Currently mathematics content is delivered to ELLs in the classroom utilizing the EngageNY Math curriculum, and literacy utilizing the Teacher College Reading and Writing Units of study. During integrated support the ENL teacher utilizes ENL methodologies such as repetition, recasting, visuals, etc as well as Specially Designed Academic Intervention in English (SDAIE) protocols including written and oral summaries of text, and graphic organizers such as Thinking Maps to support comprehension of domain specific vocabulary in math, word problems and related answer choices and algorithms. Similarly, during ELA instruction, ENL methodologies are utilized during mini lesson delivery, modeling, and small group and independent work to support ELL success in both related reading, and writing process activities. These supports are further strengthened by working with the classroom teacher to place ELL students in dynamic flexible differentiated groups with peers that can support them both linguistically and with content. Additionally, during guided reading instruction the ENL teacher follows ELL students and works with them at word work stations, independent reading stations, as well as in guided reading groups to ensure that they understand the tasks and expectations and learn the related language and literacy skills, as well as related content. During stand alone support the ENL teacher works with targeted individual and small groups of ELL students and employs the "double dose" approach, a part of FUNDATIONS to reinforce the phonemic and phonological awareness of the English language. Sight word and content area vocabulary are repeated and presented in varying contexts as necessary for reinforcement. ELLs are further exposed to fiction and non fiction leveled texts through the use of online READWORKS, HMH reader application, and other leveled reading sights as well as leveled books through echo, shared, and guided reading activities and related writing process skills, to reinforce both linguistic skills and content area knowledge. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Though no bilingual program currently exists at Mosaic the ENL teacher who is certified Bilingual/Spanish utilizes Spanish/English, Arabic/English glosssaries, peer supporters in Mandarin, Arabic and Spanish, google translator, and home language texts available in the school library to encourage development of home language literacy. 2018-19 CEP 49  At this time we do not currently have assessments in any home language that would allow for a baseline measure and continuing progress monitoring of the home languages represented at our school. The LAB-R in Spanish does provide a baseline for our Spanish speaking students but is not structured for progress monitoring throughout the year. However, as a certified bilingual teacher in Spanish/English, the ENL teacher utilizes information gathered during conferencing with Spanish speaking ELLs that provides a valuable measure of how students are progressing in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: Currently at Mosaic we have no ELL students that are SIFEs.. When we have had them though, they have received AIS services as well as support from the schools Saturday Academy which provides Tier 3--one on one intensive instruction in literacy and mathematics that provides SIFE students with the kind of differentiated intense one on one instruction that will move these student forward. Newcomer: For newcomers to the to New York state or to the U.S. and depending on their literacy levels in English as well as in their home language, appropriately leveled materials for learning are gathered by the ENL and core classroom teacher to be utilized in differentiated instruction during both stand alone and integrated support. The ENL teacher through"stand alone" instructional support provides newcomer students at the entering/emerging levels with small group and one-on-one support including frontloading of vocabulary related to content material, as well as use of “double-dosing” to facilitate retention and comprehension of English and content related material. Developing: All classroom teachers at Mosaic Preparatory Academy are made explicitly aware of the ELLs in their classrooms, the students years of ENL service, as well as their proficiency levels in general as well as in the different modalities by the ENL teacher. Together the ENL teacher with the classroom teachers then plan accordingly to meet the needs of these scholars so that they can continue to make progress in language and content acquisition.. The ENL teacher together with the core classroom teacher facilitate differentiates instruction in the classroom. This includes placing ELLs in flexible groups of peers, providing appropriately leveled texts, glossaries for language support, as well as a combination of both integrated and stand alone support needed to insure that these ELLs continue to advance in their English language proficiency and content knowledge. Long Term: The inquiry team at Mosaic will focus specifically on these scholars and is currently in the process of analyzing their specific needs, not only on an academic level, but also in terms of their social and emotional development. The guidance counselor is available to assist students who are in need of additional emotional and psychological support due to the cultural and/or linguistic difficulties they may face. Former ELLs Former ELLs continue to receive integrated support for two years after exiting the ENL program. The focus for these ELLs is to continue to develop their advanced literacy skills through related classroom content knowledge. These students are placed in 2018-19 CEP 50  flexible dynamic groups to receive peer support, challenged with more rigorous and complex texts that accelerate their academic growth. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At Mosaic, the ENL teacher/coordinator together with the school leadership team review related documentation including NYSITELL, LAB-R Spanish, NYSESLAT and IEPs to insure that together with complying with parent choice ELL-SWDs are placed in the appropriate and least restrictive environment and receive appropriate language support and the necessary and mandated services offered by the ENL program. When the ENL teacher and classroom teachers begin working with ELL-SWD's, teachers use many hands-on materials, cooperative learning strategies, peer tutoring, visual, TPR and other ENL methodologies to support ELLs with disabilities. Additionally, use of translation with the help of Spanish, Arabic and other language speaking peers, as well as applications such as Google Translate are utilized to create a favorable affective environment conducive to the academic success of these scholars. Home language glossaries and dictionaries are also made available to support these scholars. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school leadership team working with the ENL coordinator in the context of identification procedures and parent choice guidelines--make the determination of ELL-SWD placement in ICT or self contained classes. A thorough review of each students language and disability related needs are taken into consideration in order to provide the student with instruction in their least restrictive environment. Additionally, flexible use of stand alone instruction is utilized to work with ELL-SWD students to provide focused instructional time for intense one on one tier 3 and small group Tier 2 targeted instruction to scaffold development of English language skills and content and help scholars achieve benchmark levels. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. English Language Learners are eligible for any and all intervention programs that Mosaic has to offer. At-risk ELLs from any subgroup are eligible for Academic Intervention Services, guidance counseling, and are supported by a variety of streamlined intervention programs such as Wilson, Fundations, and Great Leaps to further support these students during regular school hours all throughout the academic year. SETSS and other special education support is also available to ELL-SWDs as well. Teachers are also encouraged to use Learning A-Z, Reading Tutors.com., Wordlywise, Flocabulary and other online programs. These online programs support all subject areas, from ELA, and Math, to Social Studies and Science in a differentiated manner. All support services and resources are age level and grade level appropriate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2017-18 school year, In Literacy: Professional development focusing on improving student comprehension of text and related writing skills will support teachers in next years instructional focus on improving student writing. Mosaic also plans to make a shift to the Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum. In Math: The Five Practices as related to improving Math instruction led by the assistant principal and a teacher team will be promoted 2018-19 CEP 51  as a school wide practice. Mosaic also plans to shift to the Engage NY mathematics curriculum in order to strengthen our scholars skills in this content area. The ENL teacher will align his instructional support/materials provided to ELL students with the above shifts to support ELLs in the core classroom 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. RBI --an after school enrichment program. ELLs can attend extended day (small-group tutoring services) at Mosaic’s after school program that targets standards-based reading strategies, writing skills, science, social studies and math concepts as. The Saturday Academy which provides intense academic support with a focus on strengthening ELA and Mathematics related skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher and classrom teachers use the Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study, Learning A-Z, Reading Tutors.com., Wordlywise, Flocabulary, MyOn, Readworks, HMH reader, Fry Words, and Colorin Colorado to support ELLs in acquiring advanced literacy skills. The Khan Academy, and EngageNY math curriculum online site are used to support ELLs in their development of grade level mathematical skills. These online programs also support other subject areas such as Social Studies and Science in a differentiated manner and provide supplemental supports to scaffold all content for SIFE, newcomer and developing English Language Learners. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At Mosaic given that currently the only language program available is the ENL program, home language support is offered through bilingual dictionaries in Spanish/English and Arabic/English. Bilingual books in Spanish and Arabic are also utilized and made available as well and we are currentlly lookng for Mandarin texts as well. Peer translators and translation applications such as "Google Translate" are also used for language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Through the use of EDAT, NYSITELL, Lab-R Spanish, NYSESLAT, F&P scores, as well as classroom formative and summative assessments, ELL needs are identified (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding, SWD, SIFE) and students are then placed in either the Free Standing ENL program or referred to another school in consultation with parent choice. As per NYS CR Part 154, the school leadership team in collaboration with the ENL coordinator place ELLs in classrooms and programs that will ensure they receive the services and support required as related to their age and grade level. 2018-19 CEP 52  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At this time with the exception of coordinating fire drills, and building wide school security procedures and protocols and we do not have any intersection with the ELL programs in Success Academy or the D75 schools co-located in our building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently, our school does not have a program in place to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. The parent coordinator organizes a special annual Father's Day orientation specifically aimed to involved the fathers of students that the ENL teacher utilizes to meet with fathers of ELL students to discuss activities that will support their children academic success in the home environment During the beginning of the year school assembly the ENL teacher addresses parents, outlines the ENL program and invites parents to make appointments to meet individually. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer language electives for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? : Professional development is highly encouraged and supported at Mosaic Preparatory Academy. All Mosaic staff members are sent to numerous professional development courses that cover a wide range of educational topics, from classroom management and culture to differentiating instruction effectively for ELLs. During the 2017-2018 school year, the ENL coordinator and other teachers will attend a series of training sessions, including a writing institute for ELLs, workshops which address the demands of the NYSESLAT and the ways in which NYSESLAT scores can be used to drive instruction as well as multiple trainings offered by the Department of Education’s Office of English Language Learners (DELLS) addressing a variety of ELL-related topics. Additionally, professional development is organized in house as part of the schools professional learning community. PDs are organized so as to reflect the instructional shifts mandated by the Common Core Learning Standards in English Language Arts and mathematics and related shifts to align the ENL standards to the Common Core. ELL related professional development at Mosaic is currently being organized and scheduled. The following are ELL PD's offered by the Department of English Language Learners and the Manhattan Field Support Center that have been announced and to which staff have been currently assigned to attend: From the MFSC: 2018-19 CEP 53  Presented by: The ELL Team, Fanny Castro of English Language Learners Please e-mailFCastro4@schools.nyc.gov with any questions. Date(s): 09-19-17 (03M075), 10-18-17 (04M007), 11-28-17 (TBD), 01-25-18 (TBD), 03-09-18 (TBD) Time(s): 8:30 AM - 2:30 PM The instructional focus is on academic language, academic writing, and analytical practices. This series will use the lens of advanced literacy to explore instructional approaches that can help ELLs meet the demands of high level academic performance tasks, from oral discussion, and reading comprehension to academic writing From DELLS: Scaffolding Instruction in Elementary Mathematics for English Language Learners (Grades 3 to 5) Elementary Schools/ Event: October 20 and November 10Deadline: October 19 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff through written and verbal communications throughout the school year are made aware of these requirements and the school leadership and PD team assign classroom teachers to attend professional development specifically related to ELL support. The ENL teacher is assigned to attend ELL related professional development by the school leadership and is made aware of the fifty percent requirement as part of satisfying professional certification requirements as an ENL teacher. All teachers have to record attendance at PDs including ELL related PDs on a reflection sheet in which teachers are asked to record key elements of the PD, and what how they intend to share new learnings with the school community. This sheet is which is made part of their teacher binder and kept in the Principals office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the meetings mandated by the ELL identification protocols including parent choice surveys and entitlement letters, the ENL coordinator in collaboration with the core classroom teacher at Mosaic additionally sets up periodic individual meetings with ELL caregivers separate and apart from weekly parent conferences. The purpose of these meetings is to discuss and clarify program goals, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs that have arisen during the school year and how caregivers and teachers can work together to support ELL students. Samples of student work is reviewed with an eye toward supporting a growing involvement of caregivers in the success of their children. The District representative from the Language and Translation Unit of the DOE visited last year and will visit this year to provide professional development related to the use of translation and interpretation services and improvements in the Language Line service that can be used to efficiently set up conference calls with parents who cannot attend meetings. All of the above contacts whether in person or by phone are summarized in a written log and filed. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Every day at Mosaic, our doors are open, welcoming parents to be involved in more ways than one. Our Parent Teacher Organization holds monthly meetings, encouraging parents to get involved in the school, and in their child’s education. All forms sent home are sent in the language requested. At the beginning of the school year, the parents sign a form notifying the school of which language in which they would like to receive information. There are many steps that our school takes to service ELL parents, evaluate their needs, and address their needs, in hopes of increasing parent involvement. For one, we have created a school environment that is warm, caring, inviting, and receptive to parents. Communication is key to a welcoming school climate. Communication is promoted through the use of our parent coordinator on site, home visits by staff, sending out Bilingual newsletters, providing multilingual telephone homework line, and by scheduling monthly meetings run by the Parent Teacher Organization (PTO). Many of our ELL parents have labor-intensive work schedules, which can limit their ability to attend parent teacher conferences, open house events, and PTO meetings. We are addressing this issue at Mosaic, by offering these events in the morning, afternoon, and night, to accommodate all parents work schedules. Other ways in which we attempt to address the needs of the parents is by providing translators at parent-teacher conferences, PTO meetings, etc., also by inviting extended family members to school events; especially if they can be used to translate. These opportunities support family school relations that build social networks. Additionally, the head of the DOE Language and Translation Unit has delivered professional development sessions specifically related to the use of that units resources so that teachers and staff can better communicate with ELL parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lisette Caesar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04 School Name: PS 375M Superintendent: Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Nelson Gonzalez Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registering their children, parents are required to fill out the Home Language Identification Survey. On this survey, parents indicate the dominant language that is spoken in the home and also note the language in which they would like to receive information (both oral and written) from the school. This information is entered into ATS, and a running list of parents' preferred home language is generated and kept on file in the main office, the ESL Coordinator's office, and the Parent Coordinator's office. Currently there is 1 French, 1 Asian 2 Bangla and 2 Arabic students with parents who use those languages at home. The remaining 17 students have parents whose home language is Spanish. With just some exceptions these parents require both written and oral translations. For these parents documents like the Parents Bill of Rights are provided on a counter at the front office in their home language and any other school documents are translated and made available on request. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese French Spanish Arabic 4 1 39 6 1.12 0.28 10.96 1.69 5 1 41 6 1.4 0.28 11.52 1.69 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families During the beginning of the school year at Mosaic parents receive packets containing school calendars, newsletters, schedules of PTA meetings. August/September school parent orientation. DOE scheduled student-led parent conferences (4). How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School leadership team communicates specific dates of parent orientations to the language coordinator. Language coordinator takes appropriate steps to either contact Language Translation Unit of DOE or use certified in house translators for oral and written communications. PA meetings After school programs Per school as sched. Per school as sched. Student-led parent conferences Per DOE schedule 2017-18 same as above same as above same as above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 59  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher conferences are scheduled for every Tuesday per UFT contract. As scheduled by the DOE for 2017-18. interpretation service(s)? Either via in house certified translators or using allocated funds to hire interpreters fro vendors. Curriculum nights As scheduled by school ELL mandated parent conferences. School schedule After school tutoring School schedule same as above same as above same as above 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Use of in house certified translators or use resources available from the Language and Translation Unit of the DOE. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of the school year will provide school leaders and staff with written information detailing available resources from the Language and Translation Unit of the DOE. Additionally, Ms. Furoz who is the Language Access representative that supports our district will be invited to deliver a professional development session that will outline the available services that the school can access to provide communication with parents that have home languages other then English. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Notification of translation and interpretation service availability will be sent to caregiver homes. In addition, informative signs regarding language services are posted on the school's main floor and in the parent resource room. Materials provided by the Language Access Unit of the DOE is disseminated at the beginning of the school year. Also during mandated parent orientation meetings related to ELL intake. This information is orally and visually provided. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 60  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback is gathered through parent conferences, mandated annual meetings, and parent surveys. Translation support from the Language and Translation Unit will be used to provide translation of surveys in the required languages. If necessary feedback will be gathered by phone with support from Language Line. Feedback from both parents and teachers has made the school team more aware of specific supports needed such as in house translators during parent conferences and other school meetings which has led to providing more efficient and timely coverage of translators at meetings to support parent teacher conversations. 2018-19 CEP 61 
