2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M376 School Name: Principal: NYC ISCHOOL ISORA BAILEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information NYCiSchool 310200011376 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02m376 131 Avenue of the Americas, 5th floor New York, NY 10013 917-237-7300 212-625-4810 Phone Number: Fax: IsoraBailey ibailey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: IsoraBailey Thomas Smolka Diane Rinaldoand Alfred Lynch Robert Cowan N/A KeziaDickson TaliyahBradford N/A District Information Vivian Orlan Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue vorlan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3880 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Ave ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) IsoraBailey Tom Smolka Alfred Lynch N/A N/A KeziaDickson TaliyahBradford Karen Guzman Andrea Mangano Susan Tenner *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Bill Reinisch Gina Rotundo VanesaFigueroa Sandra Iniguez Robert Cowan Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? NYC iSchool is dedicated to equipping students with the skills necessary for success and leadership in the 21st century. The iSchool program is designed to offer students opportunities to engage in meaningful work that has relevance to them and the world, choice and responsibility in determining their high school experience, and unique structures to support their development. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The NYC iSchool instructional program is designed to offer students opportunities to engage in meaningful work that has relevance to them and the world, choice and responsibility in determining their high school experience, and unique structures to support their academic and social development. We were founded in 2008 with the purpose of equipping students with the skills necessary for success and leadership in the 21st century. In support of our beliefs around student learning, classes are primarily organized using the workshop model. We believe that this model is both a structure for organizing classroom instruction and a vehicle to get students more engaged and invested in the learning task. The structure provides more time for students to explore and respond to topics and ideas through authentic texts, reflective writing, provocative discussions, and using effective learning strategies. Furthermore, it provides more time for teachers to work with individual students and for students to work with one another. We have come to a shared understanding of effective instruction through extensive common planning, department meetings, and whole staff meetings. We also use the Danielson rubric to guide classroom observations, department inter-visitations, and teacher study groups. Moreover, we have a multi-step hiring process that ensures a commitment to the mission and vision of the iSchool prior to hiring. Teachers submit an application where they propose a course they would like to teach at the iSchool and what appeals to them about the iSchool program. During the interview process, teachers have the opportunity to discuss both in a large group and in a one-on-one setting the role of an advisor, what they expect from colleagues, how they best receive feedback, and how they know if a lesson is effective. We often invite candidates to teach a demonstration lesson and model our feedback cycle with a post-observation conference. Our hiring is a team process, with students, teachers, and administrators providing input. Once hired, teachers are invited to participate in planning sessions prior to the start of the school year. In order to ensure student choice and comply with city and state mandates, the iSchool teachers design and offer many different types of courses. They typically fall into the following categories: • Modules: Interdisciplinary modules are 9-week challenge-based units, built around a “real-world” challenge that students are charged to solve or address. It is through their work on these challenges that students will learn relevant content from various subject areas and develop 21st century skills. • Core Classes: Students experience a more traditional high school curriculum through Core Experiences, courses designed to meet graduation requirements and to prepare students for their future academic careers. • Online Coursework: Online coursework is used at the iSchool for several important reasons: (1) Learning online is – and will continue to be – a reality for the world our students are growing up in. (2) Learning to make sense of online texts and resources is a critical skill for our students’ academic success as well as their ability to be literate citizens of the 21st century workplace and global community. (3) Online learning enables students to progress through coursework at their own pace, to take courses when they are ready, and to more easily and readily have their learning presented in ways suited to their style and needs, through the use of audio and visual features. (4) Finally, online courses broaden the curricular options available for our students. Some of the curricular, pedagogical and assessment practices that we expect to see in our classrooms that result in high levels of student thinking and participation include: • Vertical alignment of curriculum and experiences that are aligned to the common core and state standards • Blended and flipped classrooms • Strategic use and removal of scaffolds 2018-19 CEP 10  • Strategic grouping of students using assessments as a guide • Use of graphic organizers and other writing supports • Student choice in classes and in class products • Student exemplars and Mastery Demonstration Tasks that provide transparency and high expectations • Rubrics to inform actionable feedback • Transparent mastery grading policy • Small group “labs” offered for students needing extra support or additional entry points to the curriculum. • Various online learning platforms (ie. google classroom) to provide access to learning materials at anytime • College level texts, primary sources, and real-life experiences interwoven in the curriculum An area of focus curriculum for student-driven senior projects • Opportunity for acceleration and/or expanded course offerings via online coursework • The iSchool uses mastery based grading. Student progress is determined based on students’ mastery of content (60-80% of a grade), completion of work (30-20% of a grade), and effort (10% of a grade). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Below is a chart that describes our students by ethnicity and show the percentage of students in our school with IEPs. We are choosing to highlight the ethnicities in our school because our school is diverse (racially and economically), we need to foster an environment of open communication where all students feel valued and heard. Another special population that we would like to highlight is our students with IEPs. The students with IEPs in our school are as varied as the ethncities in our school. We have individualized schedules and action plans for all our students but students with IEPs have added support in their schedules and their schedules are reviewed every 9 weeks. Ethnicity Hispanic American Indian or Alaskan Native Asian Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander Black White Multi-racial Not Reported English Language Learners (ELL) ELL Special Education (Total students with IEPs excluding PreK) Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: receive Related Services only 99 5 38 0 69 213 10 31 5 73 6 21.29% 1.08% 8.17% 0% 14.84% 45.81% 2.15% 6.67% 1.08% 15.7% 8.22% 2018-19 CEP 11  spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 16 12 21.92% 16.44% 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our last quality review concluded with a well-developed rating. Our reviewer commended the school for: • Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the common core learning standards • Aligned use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs • Structures for positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success • Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction • Teacher teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice Our reviewer gave us one area of focus. She recommended we focus on improving classroom instruction so that it consistently yields high quality student work 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M376 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 457 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 39.0% % Attendance Rate 33.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 24.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 41.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.07 3% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 99% 98.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 42 12 92.6% 6.1% 14.0% 17.3% 8.5% 9.0% 4 21% 3.7 N/A N/A 100% 100% 100.0% 47% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYC iSchool is a high school with 457 students from grade 9 through grade 12. In 2018- 2019, the school population comprises 7% Asian, 19% Black, 37% Hispanic, and 31% White students. The student body includes 0% English Language Learners and 15% students with disabilities. Boys account for 44% of the students enrolled and girls account for 56%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 95.0%. More data points from 2018-2019:  4 year graduation rate of 98%  96.7% of students in their 1st year earned 10 or more credits  96.6 of students in their 2nd year earned 10 or more credits  97.2% of students in their 3rd year earned 10 or more credits Average Regents Score - English (CC) - 86.2 Average Regents Score - Algebra I (CC) - 79.2 Average Regents Score - Living Environment - 81.4 Average Regents Score - Global History - 82.8 Average Regents Score - US History - 84.6 Average Regents Completion Rate - 95.8 Results for the 2015-2016 Learning Environment Survey: (completed by 55% of parents, 100% of teachers, and 85% of students): Rigorous Instruction = 88% Positive Response Supportive Environment = 80% Positive Response Collaborative Teachers = 90% Positive Response Effective School Leadership = 95% Positive Response Strong Family-Community Ties = 88% Positive Response 2018-19 CEP 14  Trust = 93% Positive Response Results from the 2015-2016 Quality Review: Findings: 1. All curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and strategically embed the instructional shifts across grades and content areas. All curricula and tasks reflect student engagement in rigorous habits and higher-order skills. 2. Teaching practices align to the curricula and reflect a belief in student independence. Across the school, student work products reflect high levels of student thinking. 3. Across classrooms, teachers use and create assessments and rubrics aligned to the curricula that offer a clear portrait of student mastery. Teachers’ assessment practices consistently reflect the varied use of checks for understanding across classrooms. 4. School leaders and teachers effectively communicate high expectations to families connected to a path to college and career readiness, and establish a culture of learning that communicates a unified set of high expectations to all students. 5. All teachers are engaged in structured professional collaborations that promote Common Core implementation and improved practices. Teacher teams systematically analyze their work, and the work of students they share. Our priority need is to decrease Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school's target population will increase their average GPA by 3% and the average number of regents passed will increase to 4 by June 2019. Currently, the group has an average GPA of 72.2 and have passed (65) on average 3 regents each. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Improve the Field Experience Program Ongoing Andrea Mangano Outside partnerships, students, teachers We will implement and develop a minimum of seven new courses that will be aligned to the common core standards . Students Ongoing Staff Principal will make this school-wide goal clear to all staff and faculty and will review progress of the target group when conducting teacher supervision, data review, and instructional feedback. Principal Ongoing Staff Individual Student Assessment: Advisor will meet with each student individually and administer a whole child initial assessment to see what is impacting academics. Adviser, students ongoing Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Admin will send out iNotes to all families, 2 Student led conferences for all families, every teacher will update Jupiter grades, all staff will have open communication with parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4a. Indicate resources you 2018-19 CEP 16  will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for a Field Experience Coordinator, Senior Project coor2018-19 CEP 17  dinator, and for curriculum development by individual teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review GPAs at the end of each quarter (every 9 weeks). These dates fall on November 16th, January 26th, April 6th, and June 13th. We will be looking to see that by each quarter we see a .25% increase in student GPAs. Moreover, we will be looking to see the qualitative progress of each program. Specifically, we want to see an increase of students participating in the field experience class and we want to see an increase in students completing in the senior project experience. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Report cards, student participation rates Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school learning environment survey revealed a satisfaction rate in school culture of 94% by parents, 96% by teachers, and 93% by students. The gap between the adults in our community and the students reveals an area for improvement. Specifically, there is a trend where students tend to “agree” versus “strongly agree” on most culture questions. Moreover, on our in house student satisfaction survey, we noticed that students wanted more of a voice in the development of clubs, activities, and courses at the iSchool. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. There will be a 5% increase in the number of students that "strongly agree" in the student culture questions on the learning environment survey questions. Specifically, those dealing with student voice in the school. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Club fair to increase student participation Redesign the club participation. All clubs must do at least 1 school wide event per year Partnership with parent, staff, and students. Students will use documentary film to describe Students Students Students 10/2018 to 2/2019 Students, School Staff September to June Club facilitators September to October Administration and PA The guidance counselor will support students in hosting at least 4 lunch time discussions around important school wide issues. Students September to June Lizzette Colon 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Admin will send out iNotes, 2 Student led conferences, every teacher will update Jupiter grades, all staff will have open communication with parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT support, staff sponsors for electives, and PA funding for some clubs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of clubs will have put on one school wide event. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Club participation and completion of diversity project Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review and chancellor’s initiatives, further development is needed to enhance professional collaborations to solidify a culture of respect and continuous improvement. In order to achieve this goal it will be critical that instructional practices are aligned to expected student outcomes. Specifically, teachers will be examining one specific Danielson competency (1e). In small groups of 3 to 4, teachers will reflect on their current practice in one competency, complete outside research on the instructional strategy, write a goal about that strategy, and then implement that strategy in their classrooms. This cycle addresses our needs by: • Continuing to build strong professional learning communities • Allowing teachers to reflect on their pedagogy in a safe learning space • Creating an environment where ideas are bridged to pedagogical practices Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers improve their practice as evidenced by improved Danielson ratings for each teacher by June 2019. Specifically, 50% of teachers will increase their "Engaging Students in Learning" rating (3c) by 50%. The action plan of this component will require that teacher collaborate on lesson design by creating critical friends groups. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-weekly whole staff meetings will be used to examine and study one Danielson competency. Teachers October to April Admin Team Student data and teacher advance ratings will be used to determine groupings. Once groups are determined, teachers will share their “problem of practice” and with the support of their partners develop a data based goal to meet by June of 2019. Teachers will study and examine their specific competency using multiple resources (professional books, collegial discourse, online research, the Danielson rubric, and videos classroom instruction. Through this study, teachers will develop an action plan (for themselves and for students) that they will implement in their classrooms. Teachers September Admin Team Teachers October to June Admin team Teachers will participate in a round(s) of inter visitations to each other's classrooms. Teachers October to June Admin Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Admin will send out iNotes, 2 Student led conferences, every teacher will update Jupiter grades, all staff will have open communication with parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development time and purchase of instructional texts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 25% of teachers will have increased their advance ratings by February on 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance ratings and lesson plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2015-2016 Quality Review indicated that the administration is proficient in the number, frequency, and impact in classroom observations. However, the review indicated that our biggest area for improvement was in developing classroom instruction so that it will yield higher quality student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By April of 2019, 100% of teachers will be observed at least 4 times and receive feedback that focuses on improving teacher strategies that differentiates learning so that all students are challenged. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The administrative team will visit each teacher’s classroom at least 4 times over the course of the year, and provide teachers with formative (not for file) written or verbal feedback. These observations will utilize the Danielson rubric and feedback will be targeted ti improve student engagement and teachers’ questioning techniques. We will create an online system to track our observations. School leaders set up and follow a schedule for teacher observation and formative feedback Formative feedback will be provided within one week after 75% of observations School leaders will meet with teachers at the start and at the midpoint of the year in order to ensure that there is an alignment of teacher goals and the feedback given feedback. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers October to April 30th Administration Administration October to April 30th Administration Teachers September, January Administration School leaders will meet with the Advance TDEC coach quarterly. Administration Quarterly Administration, TDEC 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Admin will send out iNotes, 2 Student led conferences, every teacher will update Jupiter grades, all staff will have open communication with parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources found in advance and support from the superintendent’s office Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly admin meeting that will help us keep track of our progress and will give us opportunities to schedule the visits. Specifically, by the end of November all teachers should have been observed once. By the end of January, all teachers should have been observed twice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Research shows that family engagement often sees a severe drop as kids enter high school. Parents suffer “PTA burnout,” kids often attend schools far from where their parents live and/or work, and families feel that it is time for their children to “fly on their own.” But research also shows that high school students still have a need for and can benefit from family involvement that is targeted to their changing needs. The following programs are in place: • Jupiter Grades • Naviance • iSchool iNotes • Programs and Opportunities e-newsletter • Student led conferences • Advisory program • Monthly PA meetings • Parent “House Parties” Based on observations, anecdotes, communications, etc, the PA can increase the engagement and foster a stronger sense of community among parents and students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The NYC iSchool will increase parent engagement by increasing the number of parents participating in PA events by 25% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Reinvent the role of the parent grade representative by increasing the number of times they outreach to parents and by creating grade specific family activities. Parents and Students September to June Parent Reps Increase the readership of the PA newsletter and website Parents To be completed by January Parent Website Committee Translate PA materials into Spanish Parents On-going Parent Translation Committee Create and disseminate a parent survey that gives the PA executive board and school staff more insight on parent needs. Parents Yearly PA Exec Board 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Admin will send out iNotes, 2 Student led conferences, every teacher will update Jupiter grades, all staff will have open communication with parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PA Budget Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 29  By January of 2019, there will be a 15% increase in parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELA Lab and/or Office hours Small group during the school day When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and in office hours after school - one to one in office hours Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) After implementation of tier 1 and tier 2 interventions and students have not shown progress. -After a review of assessments -After a review of attendance records -After parent contact made After implementation of tier 1 and tier 2 interventions and students have not shown progress. -After a review of assessments -After a review of attendance records Math Lab and/or Office hours -Small group during the school day During the day and in office hours after school - one to one in office hours 2018-19 CEP 31 Science Lab and/or Office hours -Small group during the school day During the day and in office hours after school - one to one in office hours Global or US Lab and/or Officehours Small group during the school day During the day and in office hours afterschool - one to one in office hours Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, -After parent contact made - After implementation of tier 1 and tier 2 interventions and students have not shown progress. -After a review of assessments -After a review of attendance records -After parent contact made After implementation of tier 1 and tier 2 interventions and students have not shown progress. -After a review of assessments -After a review of attendance records -After parent contact made - After implementation of tier 1 and tier 2 interventions and At risk counseling and/or Officehours 1-on-1 during the school day During the day and in office hours afterschool 2018-19 CEP 32  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) students have not shown progress. - group in officehours -After a review of assessments -After a review of attendance records -After parent contactmade 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34 Counseling and all supplies will be given. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $9,177 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 37  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. NYC iSchool, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. NYC iSchool will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) NYC iSchool, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name NYC iSchool Borough Manhattan School Number 376 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Isora Bailey Coach Evelyn Baracaldo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vanesa Figueroa Teacher/Subject Area William Gibbons Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Devek Singh Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Michelle Leimsider Coach type here School Counselor Parent Nicole Forbes Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 460 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.87% 2018-19 CEP 46  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our School's ELL population is made up of 3 students. Two students are newcomers. They have been evaluated with teacher created assessments. This data informs our instructional plan in two major ways. First, we re-program each student every 9 weeks based on their progress. Second, we give additional support to both students within their day and after school. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ESL teacher, SETSS teachers, Advisory teacher, office hours 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? All of our ELL students have graduated from the iSchool. Current students are making progress on a yearly basis on the credit accumulation and regents pass rate. 2018-19 CEP 47  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have weekly meetings with support, guidance, and admin staff. Built into this meetings, are student checks of progress. Based on these checks, we will make adjustments to support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] An English diagnostic is administered every month. Results of these diagnostics reveal two important data points. Reading comprehension skill deficits and writing skill deficits so that we can monitor and design intervention programs for individual students 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The pattern reveals that we need to support of students in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have extra time with support teachers built into student schedules. We also offer "office hours" 3 days a week after school. We mandate this support when student struggle. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students receive the mandated hours based on his or her proficiency level though a free-standing (push-in), pull-out model. Students receive instruction in their ELA class and in extra periods added to their schedules. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All our students are scheduled with 500 minutes a week of instructional support in ESL and English. Additional support for Special needs students is offered by the ICT teachers of every grade. During ESL, ICT teachers push into classes as well as small groups instruction to help support ESL students with special needs. We provide the maximum support to all students regardless of proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are 2018-19 CEP 48  focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status If a student identified as SIFE enrolled, the iSchool would create instructional plans and provide services as per the student’s level (beginner, intermediate, or advanced) and gaps in learning. The iSchool would work collaboratively with Chelsea High School, a school with which the building is shared, to ensure that these services were provided by a highly qualified teacher of ELLs. Students identified as SIFE would be invited to participate in the afterschool tutoring available to all students. Newcomers: The iSchool would provide these students with the mandated minutes of service per week as per the students’ levels. The iSchool would work collaboratively with Chelsea High School to ensure that these services were provided by a highly qualified teacher of ELLs. Students with zero to three years of service, or newcomers, would be invited to participate in the after school tutoring available to all students. ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service: Students would be provided with the mandated number of minutes per week of services as dictated by their current level (B, I, A). The iSchool would work collaboratively with Chelsea High School to ensure that these services were provided by a highly qualified teacher of ELLs. These students would also be invited to participate in the afterschool tutoring available to all students. Long-term ELLs: In addition to providing the mandated minutes per week these students are eligible for, the iSchool would also employ other interventions and small group instruction. The iSchool would work collaboratively with Chelsea High School to ensure that these services were provided by a highly qualified teacher of ELLs. ELLs identified as having special needs The iSchool would provide ELLs with IEPs supports and services as mandated on the IEP. For students mandated for bilingual services, the iSchool would request an alternate placement paraprofessional who can support the student in his/her native language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language. 2018-19 CEP 49  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: N/A 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are encouraged to attend all after school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Student are enrolled in classes that are developmentally appropriate for their needs. Students receive an individualized schedule every 9 weeks 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All content area is delivered in English with native language support. Regents examinations are also administered in their choice of language, most take the exam in English but have the native language copy as a resource. Instructional supports are focused on English reinforcement and enrichment. Content specific skills and understandings are given in English with instructions and additional support given in their native language 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have an orientation every year and we make sure that all ELLs receive small group guidance 3 days a week. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 50  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan is targeted towards supporting all students. Using student data, we reevaluate yearly the needs of our students and teachers. All teachers at the iSchool are encouraged to attend ELL workshops hosted by the NYCDOE Office of English Language Learners, BETAC, or the CFN team and facilitated by a qualified and certified ELL teacher. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We hold an orientation for staff prior to the start of the school year. Teachers meet weekly in departments and bi-weekly as a full staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order to help parents/guardians understand the ELL program choices, the NYC iSchool invites parents of eligible students to an orientation where they view a video describing the three options and receive a brochure in their preferred language. Translated materials are provided to parents/guardians as needed. The iSchool has staff members fluent in Spanish, French, and Mandarin and the Translation Services Unit is utilized if a parent/guardian who does not speak a high incidence language needs assistance. Orientation meetings take place throughout the year as necessary and parents/guardians are invited within 10 days of student enrollment. After the parents/guardians attend the orientation meeting, they are asked to complete the Program Selection Form prior to leaving and without influence by the iSchool staff or knowledge about what services/programs are available at the school. 2018-19 CEP 51  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Isora Bailey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Isora Bailey Title Principal Michelle Leimsider Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Vanesa Figueroa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Devek Singh Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m376 School Name: NYC iSchool Superintendent: M. Bradbury The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Isora Bailey Principal No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess NYC iSchool's written translation and oral interpretations needs, data is collected from a wide variety of sources. The Home Language Survey, Emergency Blue Cards and cumulative folders are all used to assess needs. Also, we are able to determine this information from parents and families that attend mandatory orientations and open houses. Counselors and administrators will analyze the information provided by parents to determine which languages, school documents addresses and announcements must be translated. 2018-19 CEP 55  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI ITALIAN JAPANESE MACEDONIAN MANDARIN ENGLISH PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) POLISH ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SPANISH N/A N/A N/A 0.15 0 0.3 0.89 2.52 0 0.44 0.3 0.3 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0 82.96 0.15 1.19 0.3 0 9.93 1 2 2 6 13 1 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 559 1 8 2 2 66 1 2 2 6 13 1 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 559 1 8 2 2 66 0.15 0.3 0.3 0.89 1.93 0.15 0.44 0.3 0.3 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 82.81 0.15 1.19 0.3 0.3 9.78 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 56  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Handbook September 2017 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NYC iSchool provides in-house translation services tapping into the extensive resources that exist within the school. We translate the family handbook and various documents sent home during the year. These resources include school staff and parent volunteers who also speak the very same languages that are spoken by our students' families. School staff translates progress reports, at risk forms, field trip notices and any notices and any other documents that are sent home to students' families. Additionally, the our admin staff looks to the Department of Education website to retrieve common forms and applications that have been translated by the New York City's Office of English Language Learners into various languages N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September 26, 2017 Student led conferences Fall 2017, Spring 2018 IEP meetings Ongoing Promotion in Doubt Meetings Ongoing interpretation service(s)? NYC iSchool's oral interpretation needs are met by school staff and/or the call center NYC iSchool's oral interpretation needs are met by school staff and/or the call center NYC iSchool's oral interpretation needs are met by school staff and/or the call center NYC iSchool's oral interpretation needs are met by school staff and/or the call center 2018-19 CEP 57  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of a school emergency, our strategy to will be to use in-house staff to communicate with parents on the phone in Spanish and in Mandarin. In the case of other languages, we will use translation and Interpretation unit as much as possible. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff has been informed at the start of the year and again at meetings before Student Led Conferences that translation of documents and interpretation in Spanish can be handled on a on-demand basis through in-house staff. They are also informed that if services are needed for other languages, a combination of services provided by the Translation & Interpretation Unit, in-house school staff, and parental volunteers could be employed and to reach out to the LAC to assist in arranging the services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In addition to the above description of iSchool's commitment to the assessment and identification of our student's parents' linguistic needs and the strategies we have planned to meet these needs, the school further fulfills Section VII of chancellor's regulations A-663 in the following ways: by making our school a welcoming atmosphere for parents who speak languages other than English through the use of multilingual signage and public address, by informing parents of their Parental rights and responsibilities, including their right to translation and interpretation services, by informing parents of upcoming citywide educational events, and by offering information to parents about students' health, safety, and conduct in their native language Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will ask for feedback on language issues from class parents who regular reach out to their fellow parents on issues that arise and need to be brought to the attention of the teacher/school administration. Other PTA committees and groups can also be employed to assist in the effort to gather feedback. In addition, we will give students and their parents surveys to gather feedback. 2018-19 CEP 58 
