2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M393 School Name: BUSINESS OF SPORTS SCHOOL Principal: JOSHUA SOLOMON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Business of Sports School 02M393 310200011393 9-12 School Number (DBN): 439 W. 49th Street, New York, NY 10019 212-246-2813 212-246-2913 Phone Number: Fax: Vanessa Rucker vrucker@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: High Schools Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Joshua Solomon TanikaThomas EunecePaul Vanessa Rucker Rita Rodgers Kayla Smith SoraiaCampbell NA District Information RichardCintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 504, Brooklyn NY 11201 RCintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 212-923-5124 Fax: 718-923-5145 Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Schools FSC: Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax: 718-935-5941 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joshua Solomon TanikaThomas EunecePaul NA Theresa Rush Kayla Smith SoraiaCampbell Vanessa Rucker JahiraChambers Lisa Washington *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Chair/Staff Member/Staff Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) OmairaDurand Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Section 4: CEP Overview We prepare our students with the fundamentals of business and entrepreneurship for career-long success in college and the professional world. Real-life challenges and skills are integrated into every subject area, so that BOSS seniors graduate with a Regents diploma, a Career & Technical Education endorsement in Entrepreneurship, first-hand 2018-19 CEP 9  experience working with professionals in the sports industry, and the ability to handle college-level coursework in each academic area. Our vision was founded on the belief that all young people should be prepared for high-skill and high wage-careers, engage in quality learning experiences, and exhibit college and career readiness upon graduation from high school. We prepare our students for meaningful career pathways in the business industry and readiness to compete in the 21st century workforce with critical thinking, communication and collaboration. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Unique Features of BOSS Business of Sports School (BOSS) opened in September 2009 with the support of BOSS’s partner organizations, New Visions for Public Schools and FEGS Health and Human Guidance Service System. BOSS is a member of the innovative New Visions Affinity network and is based on a Career & Technical Education model and highly personalized small-school structure. The original concept of BOSS was inspired by the Mayoral Task Force on Career & Technical Education (CTE), which called for new, creative ways to prepare students for the careers of 21st Century. A planning team of teachers, administrators, sports industry professionals, and representatives from New Visions, ESPN The Magazine, and FEGS designed and proposed the BOSS concept during Fall 2008 and the official announcement by the New York City Department of Education in February 2009 was covered by media and sports blogs around the country. BOSS is an "Ed-Opt." public high school. Students are admitted on a lottery basis without regard to background or academic record. Each spring, BOSS has received approximately 1,500 applications for each of its entering classes of 108 students. We use the shared language and interest in sports to focus students on obtaining technical business skills and certifications. Our students will graduate ready to pursue careers and/or training in a variety of professions including business analysts, journalists, accountants, advertising managers, and entrepreneurs. Students participate in a rigorous and relevant program of studies that build business management and administration competencies within a core academic curriculum related to the sports and entertainment industry. Students will have opportunities for real-world learning in the sports and business community through internships, job shadowing, and career days with our numerous partners. By the end of senior year, graduates will be prepared to make informed post-secondary choices that foster student success, and include options leading to acceptance to a two or four year college and a meaningful professional career. BOSS is one of the only New York State-approved CTE programs to focus on sports business. Students fulfill Virtual Enterprise (VE) program sequence, which offers students a full CTE Business Management and Entrepreneurship curriculum that includes industry certification in Microsoft applications, national and international expositions, in-depth business simulations and competitions, and college-level business classes, culminating in a New York State endorsement in Business and Marketing. In BOSS is also a partner school of the Network for Teaching of Entrepreneurship (NFTE) and the NAF Academy of Finance. In 2013, the New York State Business Teachers Association awarded BOSS New York City Business Department of the Year (under 500 students). The school is one of five schools within the Graphics Campus in midtown Manhattan. In addition to public funding from the Department of Education, BOSS has been awarded grants by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the N.Y.C. Department of Youth & Community Development (DYCD), UJA Sports for Youth, Manhattan Borough President, the Office of the Speaker of the New York City Council, the Ford Foundation Good Neighbor Committee, American Eagle Foundation (college trips), and the Vocational and Technical Education Act (VTEA). BOSS is supported by an Industry Advisory Board of leaders in the sports industry and a Young Professionals Advisory Committee of executives in the fields of business and sports. 2018-19 CEP 10  Partnerships Virtual Enterprises International (VE): BOSS students fulfill the Virtual Enterprise (VE) program sequence, which offers students a full CTE Entrepreneurship curriculum that includes industry certification in Microsoft applications, national and international expositions, in-depth business simulations and competitions, and college-level business classes, culminating in a New York State endorsement in Business and Marketing. Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship (NFTE): BOSS students will take Entrepreneurship their junior year). NFTE provides lessons, activities, field trips, guest speakers and competitions associated with the course. NFTE's mission The Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship's mission is to provide programs that inspire young people from low-income communities to stay in school, to recognize business opportunities and to plan for successful futures. iMentor: iMentor builds mentoring relationships that empower students from low-income communities to graduate high school, succeed in college, and achieve their ambitions. Students work with their mentors one-on-one, in-person and online, to develop strong personal relationships, nurture a college aspiration, navigate the college application process, and build critical skills that lead to college success. CollegeBound Initiative (CBI): CBI empowers young women and men to realize their higher education and life potential by placing full-time college guidance experts in high-need public schools. CBI counselors maximize students’ college awareness, access, and financial aid awards. NAF Academy of Finance: BOSS and NAF are working in partnership to build a second CTE pathway within the NAF Academy of Finance network. The new Business Management partnership will include Business Economics and Sports Management courses. Big Brothers Big Sisters of New York City (BBBS): Current 10th and 11th graders are part of the Big Brothers Big Sisters Workplace Mentoring Program. Sophomore, Juniors, and Seniors have mentors, or "bigs," from the National Football League (NFL), CBS, and American Express that they meet for mentoring sessions with about twice a month. Morgan Stanley: The investment bank and BOSS have developed a two-year monthly career readiness program run by Morgan Stanley executives at their headquarters for BOSS juniors and seniors. Areas of Growth and Focus BOSS has long had an approved Business Management and Entrepreneurship program, culminating in the Virtual Enterprise course. This year, one of the priority goals is to develop a second CTE pathway in Business Management, other that will culminate in Business Economics and Sports Management. In conjunction with NAF and the BOSS, we are developing the course work and technical assessment to gain New York State approval for this new pathway. The school focuses intensely on student attendance, acting as a citywide “Model School” for addressing chronically absent students. The focus has been on continuing to reduce absences and lateness. Students come from all five boroughs, and all travel by subway from 30 to 120 min. to come to school each day. Although BOSS’s attendance of 84.5% was under the median for citywide high schools, new strategies have been implemented to not only raise the attendance rate above the citywide average, but also increase punctuality to school and class. Professional mentoring has also been an area of focus. This year, BOSS expanded both iMentor programs, so that every 9th and 10th grade student is matched with a professional mentor, who they email weekly and meet with on a monthly basis. We will continue to expand that program to the upper grades next year. BOSS also expanded its partnership with Morgan Stanley leadership, so that 30 students in each of 11th and 12th grades ago through job training with Morgan Stanley executives.. Similarly, BOSS has implemented peer mentoring through Peer Group Connections (PGC) to teach leadership courses to select groups of older students, who in turn educate and support younger students. The goal is to help 12th 2018-19 CEP 11  graders enable and inspire 9th graders to become engaged leaders who positively influence their peers. Once per week, pairs of 12th grade peer leaders meet with groups of freshmen in outreach sessions designed to strengthen relationships among students across grades. The peer leaders are simultaneously enrolled in a daily, for-credit, year-long leadership course taught by school faculty during regular school hours. Finally, BOSS has worked with CollegeBound Initiative to increase our college acceptances and enrollments. We joined the Advanced Placement Expansion and College Access for All initiatives and have increased the number of AP courses and exams offered. We also focus on increasing average exam scores and passing rates in Regents, which will in turn increase our Regents completion and "college readiness" rates. In efforts to increase the quality and quantity of college acceptances, BOSS integrated a CollegeSpring SAT preparation program into the school day, increasing the participation and rigor of the former after school program. SAT scores last year, averaged 1154 (381 per section) but are expected to rise due to the increased preparation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The incoming average student profile shows the need for comprehensive instructional support, with entering performance levels of 2.26 (ELA) and 2.17 (Math), 25.3% students with disabilities, 9.0% English Language Learners, and 8.1% entering over-age. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made most progress on Rigorous Instruction and our key area of focus will be Supportive Environment. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M393 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 426 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 5 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 73 63 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 71.8% % Reduced Lunch 8.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 3% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 62% 78.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 115 118 14 83.8% 0.7% 25.4% 33.6% 1.4% 1.4% 4 19% 5.1 N/A N/A 79% 69% 79.5% 2% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Students and Parents cite BOSS for outstanding opportunities related to our CTE Business Management and Entrepreneurship program, including internships, workplace tours, and opportunities to meet speakers.  According to our Quality Review, BOSS was deemed Proficient in Quality Indicator 1.1 Curriculum. An analysis of our Common Core aligned work and best practices highlighted Socratic Seminar, and Common Core Argument based writing. The report noted that our initiatives impacted our staff's ability to create curriculum that promotes college and career readiness for all students, including ELLs and special needs students. Similarly, the Quality Review, rated BOSS Proficient in Quality Indicator 2.2 Assessment. This was based on findings citing our use of ongoing progress monitoring including interim assessments, data analysis using the Leverage Leadership protocol, and the development of instructional action plans.   Our CollegeSpring program embeds SAT preparation courses within the 11th grade students daily curriculum and promotes ongoing tracking of student performance through monthly diagnostic exams.  Our partnership with College Now through Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) provide opportunities for students to take college level courses and gain exposure to the rigors of college level coursework.  Our partnership with the CUNY LINCT to Success program provides additional support for student's college readiness as they prepare students to pass the CUNY admissions exams.  Our focus on Common Core standards significantly improved our CC ELA Regents performance, with an average score of 76.6 and a 79% pass rate.  2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicates the percentage of students accumulating 10+ credits every year increased from 70% to 76% in 9 th grade, to 65% to 81% of students in 2 nd year, pushing 4-year graduation up to 82%. We received "Closing the Achievement Gap" ratings of 4 out of 4 for both Special Education and City Lowest Performing Students and 3 out of 4 for ELL students. Needs:  Student performance data lags behind our expectations in the areas of college readiness and Regents pass rates.  According to an analysis from College Bound Initiative (CBI), SAT scores for 2016-17, averaged 1154 (395, 382, and 380 in Math, Critical Reading, and Writing, respectively).  25% of students passed an industry-recognized CTE technical assessment according to 2016-17 NOCTI results. 24 students (31% of graduates) received a CTE endorsement for their diploma. We are developing a second CTE pathway. 2018-19 CEP 14   Our June 2017 Regents data indicates that Global History, Geometry, Earth Science and Algebra remain an instructional focus, with average scores in the 60's. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students passing Regents exams in each core subject to 75%, and increase our College Readiness Index to 35% for Class of 2019, from 22% for Class of 2017. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to implement schedule of teacher-made Interim Assessments in every subject to mirror Regents exams in November, January, and May. Students will have a simulated testing environment and will become cognizant of the content and stamina required to pass the assessments. Staff will have actionable data to monitor ongoing student progress and instructional strategies. Implement data analysis cycles and tracking of ongoing assessment data and student work at Department meetings. Enhance the "Leveraged Leadership" data analysis protocol to develop ongoing action plans for each course after each "monthly" assessment targeting “High-Impact Learning Targets (HILTs)”. Teachers will specifically identify HILTs (standards/skills) for re-teaching and “cusp” or “at risk” students who need additional intervention. Review of quality of student work and assessment tasks will take place at Department meetings to support instructional planning. Expand Regents preparation "Boot Camp" sessions. Begin Tutoring ("BOOST") sessions in September and embed tutoring throughout the school day and Saturday Academy. Increase outreach to parents regarding tutoring programs and graduation requirements through SLT subcommittees. Our Parent Coordinator will continue to host workshops on instructional support for families and increase individual outreach to families for at risk students. Embed preparation classes for US History, Global Studies into target student schedules. Continue to monitor Living Environment, Mathematics and ELA preparation courses. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students November Administration, Classroom teachers 2018, January 2019, May, 2019 All students November Administration 2018, January 2019, May, 2019 Classroom teachers, Professional Development Committee All core content area teachers; September 2018- June 2019 Academic Cabinet, Parent Coordinator, Administrators September 2018- June 2019 Administration Classroom teachers, All learning specialists Targeted students; 11th and 12th grade students Continue CollegeSpring curriculum to incorporate SAT preparation daily for 11 th graders. Incorporate professional development on Castle Learning and how to track student performance for all grades. 11th grade teachers; All teachers September 2018-June 2019 11th grade teachers, Administration All teachers 2018-19 CEP 16 Increase graduation and college matriculation rates by continuing to work with our transition point person and SIT team to target students with IEPs and at-risk students who can graduate under the new CDOS pathway to graduation 12th grade students September 2018-June 2019 Work with Department chairs to streamline best practices for Regents and College Readiness. Incorporate more vertical planning structures at Department meetings to support this practice, including using college readiness indicators as benchmarks for achievement across disciplines and HILT Mastery. All content area teachers September 2018-June 2019 SIT Team, Administration, Guidance team, Director of college counseling Professional Development Committee, Department chairs Increase exposure to Regents and college level tasks across the grades to raise familiarity with domain specific language and rigor of writing tasks. Professional Development Committee September 2018-June 2019 Professional Development Committee, Continue to work with ENL and Special education co-teachers to outreach to ELL and SPED students and families to ensure participation. Work with ENL teachers to have family outreach nights to promote awareness of College Readiness grades 9-12. September-June 2019 Special Education teachers; ENL teachers ENL teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Department chairs Administration, Classroom teachers; Special Education Liaison ENL chair, Administration, Classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1) The the administrative team will communicate with parents by sharing with them the college readiness goals for the year. 2) Updates will be sent out with families on assignment to parents via Skedula, including updates on our goal progress (Principal monitoring) 3) Invite families to come to Open School Day to meet the teachers and learn about the instruction in the classroom (Parent Coordinator) 4) Parent workshop- Run parent workshops around Student monitoring of learning. (Principal, Guidance, AP and Parent Coordinator) a) Parent Meeting - "Helping Your 9th Graders Transition to High School Successfully" with an activity to engage families in High-Impact Learning Targets and rigorous instruction - Fall 2018 (PA and SLT committee) b) Parent Meeting - Graduation Planning - Fall 2018 (Director of College Counseling and Guidance counselors) 2018-19 CEP 17  c) Individual Student/Parent Meetings for Cohort 2019 - "Getting on Track for Graduation" - Fall 2019 (Counselor) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Academic Intervention Services and Regents Prep classes after school (Title I SWP) ● Tutoring and office hours embedded throughout the school day. (FSF) ● Summer and ongoing professional development focused on writing curriculum that focuses on item analysis of Regents and alignment to Common Core (FSF) ● Use PupilPath system to keep parents/guardians informed of student progress online (Title I SWP) ● Castle Learning online Regents preparation (FSF) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark:  By January 2019, after implementation and monthly HILT data reviews will we see an increase of 35% of students receiving passing rates on Interim Assessments (mock Regents) and Regents scores for repeater students  By February 2019, we will see higher pass rates on the History (Global and US History) and Science (Living Environment and Earth Science) Regents exams of 70%, as evidenced by an increase to 70% on each exam.  By February 2019, after implementation and monthly HILT data reviews, we expect to see an increase of 10% of students meeting College Readiness indicators.Review progress made towards targets for courses: 80% for passing rates and priority standards/skills  Provide feedback on teacher action plans and progress of cusp and at risk students based on assessment data  Review outreach and participation in tutoring and AIS programs- confirm that target students are attending tutoring (BOOST) Progress monitoring:  Data analysis and Leveraged Leadership trends analysis will be held at department meetings. High Impact Learning Targets (HILTs) will be revised and groups will form based on problems of practice identified through teacher surveys and the data analysis meetings. Upcoming benchmarks:  By May 2019, we will see an increase of 35% of students receiving passing rates on Interim Assessments (mock Regents)  By June 2019, we will see an increase of 15% of students meeting College Readiness indicators. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance on teacher-made interim assessments (mock regents exams and January 2019 Regents scores). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the School Quality Snapshot, the attendance for school year 2017-18 was 84.3%. By providing a more supportive environment students will be more eager to come to school and thus increase attendance and academic achievement. 1. Strengths:  Current lateness and attendance tracking policies have led to a decrease in daily lateness by approximately 30 students.  After an analysis of attendance data, Success Mentors have been assigned to all students with less than 90% attendance. All staff are required to participate in the program and provide ongoing outreach and support for those students. Incentives through numerous grants are provided to students who have made the greatest increases in attendance. Support from our additional social worker will provide 1-1 time for at risk students as well as monthly incentives for students meeting attendance benchmarks.   Ongoing support from our guidance department has increased the number of overage and under-credited students (LTAs) who have been able to transition to alternative schools and obtain high school graduation credentials. Implementation of CAASS system (rather than paper bubble sheets) to track period attendance has increased our ability to track student's period attendance accurately and identify time frames of concern.  Areas of need:  Additional outreach is needed for our at-risk and lowest-third citywide students, who comprise the majority of BOSS’ current Long-Term Absences and who are also "over-age and under credited" students.  We have a large number of chronically absent students, 48% of our overall student body (20% is severely chronically absent) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our school’s attendance to 88%, from 84.3% in 2017-18. We will analyze data from CAASS and Attendance Task Force reports to determine if we have met our goal. 2018-19 CEP 20 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, guidance team, parent coordinator At risk students/All students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, guidance team, teachers, Success Mentors All students November 2018-June 2019 12th graders; all students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, guidance Parent Coordinator, Guidance and college counselor, 12 th grade chair Dean Team, Administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Incentives funded through AIDP grant for students for perfect and improved attendance and punctuality. Awards for Improved Attendance in each class, along with academic awards in each class. “Advocates” outreach program where each staff member is focused on increasing communication and outreach to families. Success Mentors to work with chronically absent students, meet with them on a regular basis and call home when not in school; Home visits Weekly Attendance Summit that includes tracking of students with high or increasing number of absences and lateness and coordination of attendance strategies, using data dashboard created by New Visions Annual Parent Resource Fair that invites external CBOs and organizations to Parent-Teacher Nights to act as a resource for parents; New incentives for 12 th grade students: including internship program and outside lunch. Continue to implement our new lateness policy that more closely monitors student attendance to period 1 through increased out reach to parents and stricter lateness policies. All students September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct Parent information workshops to help parents and families address attendance issues: September: orientation to PupilPath, our interactive attendance and grade website   October: workshop on DOE and school attendance policy and family addressing absence and lateness issues  November: Parent resource fair on community resources  Parents of students with attendance between 55- 75% will be contacted by the school to discuss possible reasons and solutions to their child's attendance problem, as well as participate in a workshop on how to help their child be engaged in school.  Automated calls and emails will go on regarding absences 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Automated call out (School Messenger) system (FSF) ● PupilPath (Title I SWP) ● Attendance Teacher – one day a month (Field Support Center) ● Prizes for attendance awardees (OTPS). (AIDP) ● Displays for perfect and improved attendance (FSF) ● BOSSWeekly Bulletin emailed to all parents in English and Spanish ● Frequently updated website news and announcements ● Parent Summit and Parent Association meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will see attendance at 88% and chronic absenteeism below 40%. Progress monitoring: Weekly ongoing data analysis by attendance committee will review accuracy and proficiency of attendance tracking. Monthly review of data by attendance committee will identify: a) students meeting benchmarks b) Success Mentor interactions and attendance data for the mentees; c) impact of incentives d) academic progress of LTA students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CAASS and Superintendent Attendance reports; ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  According to our Quality Review, our curricula are informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and  the Common Core instructional shifts, leading teachers to consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and students with disabilities, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. Similarly, the report found that the majority of our teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. It also indicated that teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share and on whom they are focused. The inquiry work teachers are engaged in results in progress toward goals for groups of students, while also strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers.  The Quality Review also found that our teachers collect data, identify skills that students need to improve, and develop action plans for addressing these areas. They reflect again and review examples of student work in the spring to see if the instructional adjustments they made had impact. For example, teachers identified students struggling with counterclaims and developed specific lessons around counterclaims and citing evidence; later teachers were able to point to student work that shows counterclaim use improving. Teachers create impact statements and, in turn, administrators conduct observations to make sure that these strategies are being implemented. Areas of need:  The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicated that 80% of students know in most of their classes, what the  teacher wants them to learn in their classes (Q2e) and that 80% say that in most of their classes, the work they do is good preparation for their exams (Q2c). 86% of students responded that in most of their classes, it's clear what they need to do to get a good grade (Q2b). In survey questions about teachers' most recent instructional unit, 71% of teachers agreed that they had the resources and tools they needed to included multiple opportunities for reaching and writing experiences grounded evidence from text (Q17b) and 67% agreed they had the resources and tools to included multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text (Q17c).  Data from the ADVANCE MOTP Dashboard indicate that the components of Danielson Domain 3: Using Assessment in Instruction is an area of focus though most teachers have made ongoing progress in the domain throughout the year but Domain 1 (Planning) is still a key focus.  Regents data, particularly a Regents Completion of Remaining Regents Rate of 41.6% indicates that student performance is an area of growth 2018-19 CEP 23  Anecdotal evidence, inquiry group data, and student reflections indicate that students have difficulty accurately identifying what they know and need to know and what are the key learning targets in each course. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will collaboratively develop and monitor 36 High-Impact Learning Targets (HILT's) for each year-long course and implement Unit Plans that include HILT Overview Sheets so that students, teachers, and family can monitor progress towards mastery, as measured by the number of HILTs entered into their online portfolios. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher led Professional Development sessions to model best practices in questioning/discussion, engagement and assessment. Implement Google Doc teacher surveys so teachers can identify priority areas of need and strengths. Recruit teacher presenters based on survey and observation data. Identify key “High-impact Learning Targets” (HILTs) in each content area-at least 3 per unit (approx. 1 per week) and conduct monthly meetings to review targets, assessment measures and student progress towards mastery. Support teachers in making revisions to unit plans as necessary. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Professional Development Committee, Special Education and ENL Departments All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Professional Development Committee Ongoing opportunities to collaborate at Department meetings to conduct data analysis from ongoing HILT assessments. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Ongoing individualized coaching and planning support from our instructional coach and Special Education Coordinator and ENL Coordinator. All teachers, new teachers, September 2018-June 2019 new ICT partner teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Professional Development committee, Special Education and ENL departments, Department Chairs, Administration Instructional Coach, Administration, Special Education Coordinator, ICT partnerships, ENL teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a variety of ongoing methods to support families understanding of our new HILTs initiative throughout the school year, including- 2018-19 CEP 25  Parent Association Meetings: HILTs (High Impact Learning Targets- What they mean and how you can monitor your child's progress) Fall 2018 - (Parent Association and Assistant Principal) Quarterly Parent Teacher Conferences : Teachers will present HILT Overview sheets to parents and families during four annual Parent-Teacher Conferences (September, November, March, May) and discuss ongoing student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Bi-weekly department inquiry meetings (during professional development time)  Accountable talk/ Think Share/Exchange protocol, Depth of Knowledge/Questioning professional development, (FSF) Summer and year-long Professional Development on Common Core Learning Standards (Title I) Literacy Coach and Math Coach focused on CCLS-aligned curriculum (Title I, FSF)    Professional Development Committee - weekly meetings  Data Analysis professional development - ongoing   Teacher team meetings to share curriculum and look at student work (September through June, grade Shared rubric for Core Curriculum-aligned tasks (September through June, Literacy coach) meetings)  Weekly professional development meetings (September through June, facilitated by Principal, Assistant Principal, and Literacy Coach)  Classroom informal and formal observations (October through June, by Principal, Assistant Principal and Co)  Weekly Department, Grade Team, or Inquiry Team Meetings to share best practices among teachers; look at student work, and share learning from anchor text (September through June).  Teacher inter-visitations and debriefs - ongoing  Curriculum Mapping (September through June, faculty) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks:  By January 2019, we will see a 20% increase in evidence of Effective instructional practices for Using Assessment in Instruction and Implementation HILT overview sheets Progress Monitoring:  January-March 2019: Check-in meetings with administrators and teaching staff to review HILT progress and implementation of HILT tracking  April-May 2019: Professional Development (PD) committee will review next steps for PD plan based on evidence of teacher practice and teacher surveys Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 26  Review of HILT Unit overview sheets per course; Evidence from ADVANCE observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to for students to be prepared for the workforce, students need to track their progress in work-based activities. We have developed a Career Plan document to track student progress through mentoring, internships and progress towards career goals. As students develop career skills their potential for college and professional success rise. Strengths:  According to our Quality Review, our students leverage numerous partnerships in the sports and business world and teachers give students multiple opportunities to create real-world products and to present their ideas for feedback from authentic audiences in business settings. These experiences continuously challenge students to develop sophisticated work products while also advancing communication and presentation skills. Many of our 11th and 12th grade students have won business plan writing and presentation competitions hosted by authentic institutions including Ernst & Young and Morgan Stanley, and several students have received investor funding for their new ventures.  Our established mentorship program with iMentor provides students with mentors in the professional world beginning in 9th grade and continuing on to graduation.  BOSS Peer Group Connections program provides mentorship opportunities between 9th and 12th grade students through student facilitated workshops and activities during the 9th grade advisory period.  Ongoing partnerships with Big Brothers and Big Sisters (BBBS) and partner companies American Express, CBS, and the NFL leverage on-going relationships with professionals and athletes.  11th and 12th grade students participate in a two-year mentorship program with Morgan Stanley to develop professional skills such as interview techniques, public speaking, and resume writing.  Our Learning Environment survey indicated that 70% of students feel that there is an adult keeping them on track.  BOSS is renewing its New York State CTE certification in Business Management & Entrepreneurship, which is necessary for students to receive a CTE endorsement and Advanced Regents Diplomas for graduation. We are also developing a second Business Management, Other (Sports Management) pathway during the 2018-2019 school year. Areas of need:  We need a more structured way to capture information about each individual students' experiences and progress to goals in the area of work-based learning. Career Plans have not been consistently completed by teachers and students to provide a completely accurately picture of student progress. Students in 9th and 10th grade do not spend enough time developing work-based skills or experience; much of the professional experience happens in the upper grades.  2018-19 CEP 28   Only 45% of teachers respond that the school teaches students the skills necessary to self-regulate behavior and only 59% of teachers respond that the school teaches organizational skills needed to be prepared for their next level (Learning Environment Survey) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Development of protocol for the development of digital Career Plans and Portfolios to begin in grade 9 and track throughout their four years at BOSS All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers CTE Department Peer Group Connections program: every 9th grade student is in an Advisory class led by a 12th grade Peer Leader. Peer Leaders meet four days per week for mentoring training. 9th & 12th Grade iMentor program: matches every BOSS student with a mentor, with weekly emails and monthly meet in-person meetings 9th and 10th Grade Morgan Stanley Program (formerly PENCIL): 11th and 12th grades students are mentored and receive job training from Morgan Stanley executives monthly Business Management & Entrepreneurship Internship Program and New Senior Internship series: Students conduct Career & Technical Education internship supervised and evaluated by the certified Work-based Learning (WBL) Coordinator 11th and 12th Grade 12th Grade September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers/Counselors who are training student Peer Leaders On-site iMentor program staff, Social worker CTE Department CTE Department, Work-based learning (WBL) Coordinator, Senior College Study teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent/mentor events to promote relationship building - ongoing (iMentor and School staff)  PGC Family Night Fall 2018 and Spring 2019- (PGC Mentors and Parent Coordinator, PGC Coordinator)  Career plans and portfolios shared with families during at least two Parent-teacher conferences per year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Partnerships with Virtual Enterprise, NAF and NFTE (VTEA grant)  Google Classroom tracking of Career Plan (FSF)  College Access for All (CA4A grant) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 30  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark:  By February 2019 , 75% of all students will be involved in a mentoring or job shadowing experience and will have attended a summer planning opportunities event, as documented in our CTE trackers and digital portfolios. Progress Monitoring:  We will monitor participation in internships mentoring, and other work-based learning experiences on our CTE trackers digital portfolios.  By June 2019, 15% of additional students will be matched for job-shadowing opportunities during the summer, as evidenced by our Work Employability Skills Profiles ( trackers digital portfolios). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance in mentoring programs; Development of Career plans and Employability profiles; Attendance at Work-based learning (WBL) activities; Review of CTE trackers and digital portfolios. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength:  Weekly Bulletin: all parents receive a weekly emailed bulletin and photos with all school events, parenting tips, and celebration of student and staff accomplishments, in English and Spanish. All families and students also receive a celebratory calendar of school events and photos.  Parent/Family Database: we have complied a updated parent contact information and have created Email and text groups for Parent Cohorts on our own school-operated Gmail domain  Outreach Efforts for Accepted Students Night: over 85 families were in attendance for incoming students based on a coordinated effort of individualized outreach  100% of Teachers reported that there is an expectation that teachers communicate regularly with parents/guardians. (School Quality Guide 2016-17)  92% of Teacher report that a lot or all of their students work hard to do well. (School Quality Guide) Areas of Need:  Recent attendance data indicates fluctuating participation from families at Parent-Teacher Conferences for the 2016-17  83% of Parent Involvement in School (School Quality Guide)  65% of Teachers agreed that parents and guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe the instructional program (School Quality Guide)  87% of Parents agreed that school staff communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. (School Quality Guide) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly parent celebration and information events held at the school for parents, such as workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, neighborhood walking tours, and awards celebrations to generate parent engagement in the school community. Parents & Families September 2018-June 2019 Principal; Parent Coordinator BOSS Weekly Bulletin with photos, celebrations, and announcements about the week to inform families of the events and accolades of the school community. Parents & Families BOSS printed calendar of photos and key dates for the year Family events with each of key CBO partners: CBI College Night (October), PGC Family Night (January), iMentor junior college night with mentors and families (April) to raise awareness about school programs and opportunities available to students. Discuss Students of Concern with key cabinet and school support staff at weekly meetings; Review outreach data, student OORS data and academic grades (New Visions Portal progress reports) at the weekly meetings. Success Mentors assigned to support struggling students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Teachers Principal CBO Program staff, Teachers, Guidance Parents & Families Parents & Families Students of concern October 2018-June 2019 Cabinet, administration and guidance Chronically-absent students October 2018-June 2019 Success Mentors If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. iMentor: College Night event for both families and mentors Peer Group Connections: PGC Family Night Parent Activities: such as workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, neighborhood walking tours, and awards celebrations coordinated by Parent Coordinator Use of communication applications ((tools include PupilPath, Remind, and Google Voice) 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● CBO Partnership fees (CA4A grant, Title I) ● Guidance and teacher per-session (FSF) ● Interpretation and Translation funds (TL Interpretation) ● Parent Association (PA Funding) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark:  By February 2019, teacher monthly out reach to parents will increase by 70% as evidenced by Skedula anecdotal logs.  By February 2019, 90% of family emails will be registered as evidenced by Pupil Path data and school records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PupilPath anecdotal outreach tally Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  Nomination by subject teacher  8th grade ELA scores  Summativeand formative exams Fountasand PinnellBenchmark Assessments (Teal Kit)   Formativeand summativeexamscores (midterm scores)  Assignment by subject teacher  8th grade Math scores  Regents scores  Formativeandsummativeexamscores (midterm scores)  Assignment by subject teacher  Regents scores  LeveledLiteracy interventionsystem (LLI) reading support  Double period Algebra I class, incorporating Transitions to Algebra (TtA) curriculum  After-school BOOST tutoring   Small class, 1-8 students Small class, 1-15 students  Small Group 1-15  After-school BOOST tutoring  Pull-out services throughout the school day  After-school BOOST tutorial  Tutoring during lunch period Saturday Academy   After-school BOOST tutorial  Tutoring during lunch period  Formativeandsummativeexamscores (midterm scores) After-school BOOST tutoring Small Group 1-15  Assignment by subject teacher  Regents scores Global/US prep period After-school BOOST tutorial During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Attendance Task Force  Anecdotals  Discipline incidents  Guidance Referral form  Counseling support  Yoga  Restorative Circles SuccessMentors   Advocate Groups  Small Group 1-10 students  One-on-one Saturday Academy  After school  During lunch period  During the school day 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 34 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing are supported in a number of ways in our school:  All STH students are offered after-school four days per week and they have flexible AIS services during lunch period or after school if they desire. The library is also open until 5:00 p.m. for completing research and homework.  We have a certain amount of school supplies, clothing, and toiletries available for students funded through STH funding if they need. We also provide a year-long loan of a computer laptops to students with a demonstrated need. In addition, our Industry Advisory Board members and other supporters donate professional wear for use on Work-based Learning (WBL) activities related to our CTE program in Business Management and Entrepreneurship. Students are offered in at-risk counseling if they are identified through our Student Support or needing mental health support.   We offer the use of several computer lab that is open to all parents and students during lunch periods and after-school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Networking with partner universities and organizations, such as New Visions for Public Schools and the National Foundation of the Teaching of Entrepreneurship (NFTE) ● Professional development on topics identified by self-assessment surveys and school leadership observations ● Outreach through school website and teacher fairs ● Use of Curriculum Coach to incorporate common core standards into curriculum ● New Visions PD made available to faculty ● Bi-weekly Department Meetings ● Bi-weekly grade team meetings ● Planning time with co-teachers ● Use of walk-throughs and observations to help faculty 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional development on topics identified by self-assessment surveys and school leadership observations ● Outreach through school website and teacher fairs ● Use of Curriculum Coach to incorporate common core standards into curriculum ● New Visions PD made available to faculty 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Biweekly Department Meetings ● Biweekly grade team meetings ● Planning time with co-teachers ● Use of walk-throughs and observations to help faculty Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) and Professional Development committees, teachers and administration will collaboratively select and implement assessments to measure progress to Regents completion and Career and Technical Education-endorsed diplomas. These recommendations are forwarded to an Academic Cabinet with teacher and administrator members, to make the final selection of multiple assessment measures. The Professional Development committee will then plan PD to ensure assessment results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 CEP 40  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 237,894.00 0 0 0 3,320,050.00 x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4, 5A, 5B, 5C 4, 5A, 5B, 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 41  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Business of Sports School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and discussions in School Leadership Team and Parent Association will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Business of Sports School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology, such as  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 43   sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community, including ;  providing job-based training for all students, including internships, mentorships, and other work-based learning opportunities. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact (parents and staff collaborate on the development of the School Comprehensive Education Plan, the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, and the School-Parent Compact and parents elected parent representatives on the School Leadership Team);  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; schedule four additional parent meetings in September, November, March, and May, in the evening and afternoon to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; and translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed.   The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Meeting in October, where parents review and evaluate the effectiveness of the school's Title I program; 2018-19 CEP 44   sending out Weekly Bulletin in English and Spanish with celebration of student and staff accomplishments and student activities, opportunities, and scholarships.  hosting educational family events/activities during four Parent-Teacher Conferences (September, November, March, and May) and monthly throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents in the 6th floor library;  encouraging more parents to join our mentoring and leadership events, just as Senior College Night (October), iMentor meeting events (monthly), and Peer Group Connections Family Night (December)  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing an online Weekly Bulletin in Spanish and English every Sunday night designed to keep parents informed about school activities and opportunities;  developing a clear, informative website at www.nycBOSS.org that includes an updated calendar of events for parents and families and distributing access to PupilPath, which is a real-time password-protected gradebook and attendance website;  providing school planners and calendars for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Business of Sports School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the state's Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    conducting parent-teacher conferences every quarter during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30 of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs, such as CollegeSpring, iMentor, Peer Group Connection, and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 45   respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information, including access to PupilPath, a real-time password-protected gradebook and attendance website; and  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; assist my child in coming to school dressed in the school uniform;   provide an email address or text number to open a line of communication between the family and school;   check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 46  set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;   promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education, such as with the School volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Leadership Team and Parent Association; communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; and share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child.   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:        attend school regularly and arrive in first period by 8:20 a.m. every day haven already eaten breakfast in the school cafeteria or at home; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; attend school tutoring when you require additional assistance with an assignment; and always try my best to learn and ask peers or teachers when you do not understand. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Additional language acquisition enrichment is available to ELLs in key each content areas during our BOOST after school and Saturday Academy program. This program is designed to further develop student literacy skills and academic and domain specific vocabulary for each content area. Students are identified by staff based on item analysis of Interim Assessments conducted three (3) times a year and ongoing progress towards High Impact Learning Targets identified by teachers before each unit. Title III funds are used for direct instruction and additional funding comes from per-session. Materials are of no cost. Departmental trends identified indicate that ENL students consistently score below their counterparts in Science, History and ELA and have increased rates of failure on our quarterly failure report. Item analysis conducted using Leverage Leadership frameworks indicate that 90% of ELLs struggled to: a) accurately understand the vocabulary embedded in the multiple choice and essay questions asked in the midterm, final and mock Regents across content areas ex. Global, ELA, Living Environment b) accurately understand the vocabulary embedded in the passages and documents presented in the midterm, final and mock Regents across content areas ex. Global, ELA, Living Environment. c) accurately include relevant evidence on short constructed response questions across all content areas. Program Structure for BOOST After School Program: * 3xs a week * Starting 9/11/18 - 12/21/18; 1/2/19-6/6/19; 95 sessions * 2:45- 4:00pm * Language of Instruction: English * Teachers will utilize a co-teaching model daily. * Target student subgroup: ELL students * One (1) ESL teachers and One (1) Content area teachers will hold an after-school session three times per week. All content area teachers have content specific certifications in: Global History and English. Global History: focus on developing academic and domain specific vocabulary; reading and writing scaffolds to support literacy development and writing fluency in English; strategies to promote de-coding, cognate identification and familiarity with question stems in multiple choice questions. ELA: focus on grammar, sentence structure, and organization. ELL students learn to utilize the Common Core aligned writing framework. All ELL students practice writing essays that are common core aligned. Scaffolding experience includes the use of models, graphic organizers, and peer editing workshops. Materials: 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information a) Daily instruction: writing frames; problem solving scaffolds; student glossaries, graphic organizers and scaffolded Depth of Knowledge (DoK) questions to support content mastery and build common core skills. Castle Learning; www.castlelearning.com for assessment practice. b) Supplemental materials: 1) Zinc Reading Labs- http://www.zinclearninglabs.com - Reading comprehension, vocabulary and assessment online tool 2) Quizlet- https://quizlet.com - Vocabulary online and assessment tool BOOST Saturday Academy Program Structure * 2xs a month * 2nd and 4th Saturday of every month - Starting December- June 10th. 13 Sessions * 9:00 a.m.- 12:00 p.m. * Language of Instruction: English * Teachers will utilize a co-teaching model during each session. * One (1) ESL teachers and One (1) Content area teachers will hold a Saturday Academy session. All content area teachers have content specific certifications in: Living Environment Living Environment: focus on developing academic and domain specific vocabulary; reading and writing scaffolds to support literacy development and writing fluency in English; strategies to promote de-coding, cognate identification and familiarity with question stems in multiple choice questions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development sessions will target how all teachers can support ELL students' literacy skills and the development of academic and domain specific vocabulary which will support language acquisition and increased performance in content area assessments. Similarly, our staff will receive ongoing professional development on how to prioritize "High Impact Learning Targets" (HILTs) and use data analysis to monitor the progress of Title III Eligible students. Topic: "Teaching the Critical Vocabulary of the Common Core for ELLs- Part 1" November 27, 2018. Facilitators: Sabrina Fouts (ENL Chair), Francis Daniel (ENL Teacher), Rinah Fernandez (Assistant Principal) Target Audience: all content area teachers Time: 3:00-4:00 p.m. Description: Teachers will explore key vocabulary strategies aligned with brain based learning research which are identified in Teaching the Critical Vocabulary of the Common Core by Marilee Sprenger (2014). This workshop is designed to assist content area teachers in the instruction of academic and domain specific vocabulary aligned to Common Core assessments. Topic: "Technological Tools to Support Academic Language Development for ELLs" January 21, 2019 Facilitators: Sabrina Fouts (ENL Chair), Gloria McCabe (History Teacher and Google Liaison) Target Audience: all teachers 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Time: 3:00-4:00 p.m. Description: Teachers will showcase online resources to use for instructional practice and assessment to track student vocabulary development including "Zinc Reading Labs", "Quizlet" and "Kazoo". Topic: "Teaching the Critical Vocabulary of the Common Core for ELLs- Part 2" February 12, 2019. Facilitators: Sabrina Fouts (ENL Chair), Francis Daniel (ENL Teacher), Rinah Fernandez (Assistant Principal) Target Audience: all content area teachers Time: 3:00-4:00 p.m. Description: Teachers will share key instructional strategies, artifacts, student work and data resulting from vocabulary strategies study on Teaching the Critical Vocabulary of the Common Core by Marilee Sprenger (2014). Topic: "Teaching Basic Writing Skills: The Hochman Method for ELLS", April 2, 2019 Facilitators: Sabrina Espinetti (ENL Chair), Stephanie Aubry (Instructional Coach) Target Audience: all teachers Time: 3:00-4:00 p.m. Description: Teachers will present writing scaffolds and instructional strategies from the Hochman method "Writing Revolution" and "Teaching Basic Writing Skills" by Judith Hochman, targeting the development of effective paragraph writing to support student writing of short constructed responses and Common Core essays. Scaffolds will target needs demonstrated by ELL, Special education and at risk students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parent engagement activities are designed to help increase the participation and awareness of ENL parents in the college application process. Through workshops, we aim to provide additional supports to ENL parents in the college readiness and college application process 1) Parent College Readiness Workshop for ELLs- November 2019; an introduction to best practices for College Readiness Facilitators: Sabrina Espinetti (ENL Teacher), Francis Daniel (ENL Teacher), Vanessa Rucker (Assistant Principal), Janet Tejada (Parent Coordinator) Topic: 9th and 10th grade parents will be invited to participate in a workshop as staff present key factors that will enable their child's success and will review the support systems offered at our school for both students and families. The presentations will be run in multilingual sessions. 2) Parent College Access Workshop for ELLs: December 2018 Facilitators: Jeffrey Petway, (College Bound Initiative- Director of College Counseling), Janet Tejada (Parent Coordinator) Topic: 11th and 12th grade parents will be invited to participate in a College Access workshop- highlighting the next steps of the college application process. Translation services will be provided. 3) Parent Financial Aid for College Workshop for ELLs: January 2019 2018-19 CEP 51 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Facilitators: Jeffrey Petway, (College Bound Initiative- Director of College Counseling), Janet Tejada (Parent Coordinator) Topic: 11th and 12th grade parents will be invited to participate in a College Financial Aid workshop- highlighting how to research and apply for financial aid for college. Translation services will be provided. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Business of Sports School Borough Manhattan School Number 393 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joshua Solomon Coach Stephanie Aubry ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sabrina Fouts Teacher/Subject Area Raven Connor/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jahira Chambers/Spec. Ed. Related-Service Provider Courtney Sacco Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Rinah Fernandez-Vasquez Coach type here School Counselor Margarita Fermin Parent Eunece Paul Parent Coordinator Annie Leon Field Support Center Staff Member Jamie Baez Other (Name and Title) Francis Daniel C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 461 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.85% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school assesses ELL literacy skills through baseline Common Core assignments in each different core subject. We will use the data to program additional reading support using the LLI methodology if necessary. The insights provided by this data help the ESL and content area departments determine whether or not the ELLs would benefit most from push-in or pull-out ESL services. We also collaborate with the SpEd department to assess SpELLs and develop targeted strategies in order to attempt to address and meet the IEP goals. The data from the teacher-created assessments, baseline assessments and tests mentioned above are used to determine areas in need of improvement in the freestanding ENL classes for the Entering and Emerging level ELLs, based on the previous year’s NYSESLAT scores. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 54  We have incorporated common planning time for ENL teachers, general education content area teachers and special education teachers into their schedule. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We do not have enough ELL students to receive a determination of Annual Yearly Progress from New York State, but we believe that we are successfully meeting the needs of our ELLs compared to other comparable schools to meet Common Core and College Readiness standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have multiple forms of intervention available for our ELLs, once we’ve determined what specifics they need to improve their performance on the summative assessments, including: Saturday Academy (tutoring session available every Saturday) and regular tutoring hours during the school week both during lunch and after school, embedded strategies in the lesson plans such as ZINC Reading Labs for vocabulary support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have new students take the NYSITELL to determine their English proficiency. We also use the NYSESLAT exam. The scores on the NYSESLAT indicate that the majority of our students are long-term ELLs with transitioning to expanding levels in speaking and listening. Their reading and writing levels vary but are usually lower than their speaking and listening levels. We have a high number of SpELLs in the 9th, 10th and 11th grades whose SpEd disabilities may be interfering with their language acquisition and/or their ability to score higher on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These assessment scores are used to determine student grouping, whether heterogeneously or homogeneously, during any given class activity or group task. The assessments are shared during cabinet and department meetings to make program adjustments. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are grouped heterogeneously and cohorted together in their grade. ELL schedules are blocked together in core classes. All ELLs receive integrated instruction according to the number of mandated hours. However, Entering students also receive the mandated 180 minutes of standalone ENL and Emerging students receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, as per CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL Department, in conjunction with the school programmers, establish the proficiency levels of each student before classes begin in September using the scores found on the RLAT. When levels are determined, the ENL department notifies the programmers which students require which number of mandated ENL hours and the programmer creates their schedules accordingly. Therefore the ENL teachers are guaranteed to deliver at least the minimum number of mandated ENL hours for every ELL. Entering ELLs receive a minimum 540 minutes of ENL, 180 of which are in standalone ENL. Entering level students receive a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL, 90 of which are in standalone ENL. Transitioning students receive a minimum of 180 minutes of ENL. Expanding students receive a minimum of 180 minutes of ENL. Commanding students receive a minimum of 90 minutes of ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As we have a push-in/pull-out ENL model, the ENL teacher collaborates with the content area teacher to ensure that ENL modifications are being used in all classes. The content area and ENL teachers provide instruction only in English but ensure that content is comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards by introducing scaffolds, eliciting prior knowledge, providing graphic organizers, using realia, providing small group pull-out instruction, etc. to provide students with the support necessary to grasp the content material and successfully complete Common Core tasks. We do not have TBE or Dual language programs. Native language support is offered through the use of bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and students of the same L1 grouped together to aid each other in their L1. When possible teachers who speak the same L1 either teach the ELLs or are available for tutoring before or after school. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in English throughout the year in their classes and by taking the NYSESLAT. As we do not have a TBE or Dual Language program, there is no formal evaluation in the student's home language throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) have either a teacher who speaks the native language or a certified ENL teacher help them develop higher levels of their English skills, academic and organizational skills, and native language skills, where possible. These students follow a push-in/pull-out ESL model. Their teachers are notified as to who their SIFE students are, so that they can plan accordingly. SIFE students also receive standalone ENL until they receive a score of Transitioning on the NYSESLAT and therefore have their SIFE status removed. b. Students in US schools less than three years receive intensive ESL support, which includes optional lunchtime and after school study skills courses and preparation for all high school Regents exams to simultaneously help them improve their proficiency levels in English and complete the coursework in their core content areas. In addition, the materials for their other courses are modified so that they can complete the same works as their native speaking classmates. c. For ELLs receiving service from 4-6 years the areas in which they struggle have been identified and they receive tailored instruction to raise their understanding. Like the newcomer ELLs, the materials for their other courses are modified to their level so that they can complete the same works as their native speaking classmates. d. The long-term ELLs receive the same services and support as the other ELLs, but in addition, like the newcomers, they are receiving extra support in the form of tutoring and AIS. Furthermore, certain students may begin the evaluation process to see if there is a learning disability that has affected their ability to adequately learn English. 2018-19 CEP 56  e. Former ELLs are still tracked by the ENL department and have the option of attending the same optional lunchtime or afterschool enrichment classes. They are also given all ENL accommodations on all tests and Regents exams. Furthermore, for up to two years after exiting ELL status these students receive a minimum of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDS use team-teaching strategies, such as parallel grouping, guided reading, graphic organizers, native language glossaries and modified curriculum to ensure access to all academic content and complete long-term language learning goals. All ELLs have access to computers or laptops in the classroom. ELLs and SWDs then have the opportunity to use Google Read & Write tools to decipher and understand text. These tools include: definitions in English, a bilingual translator, picture dictionaries, read alouds of the text, embedded photos and videos, and the Explore tool to further investigate new words. The entire history department and many other departments use Google Classroom and differentiated texts for the ELLs and SWDs. Students in history are assigned grade appropriate and leveled texts, annotation strategies provided by the New Visions curriculum. In ELA students are provided with graphic organizers for writing, scaffolded texts, annotation strategies, Stop and Jot resources. Many departments also use Edpuzzle and ZINC Reading Labs to incorporate visuals and aural reinforcement of information.In Science and Math students are provided with personal glossaries and technology to support vocabulary development. In addition, this year we will be utilizing writing frames from the Hochman method. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We schedule the ELL-SWDs to attend team teaching classes with an ELL and special education teacher, using flexible programming to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers in the same classrooms. Special education, ELL, and general education teachers have common planning professional periods, per a school SBO. ELLs with special needs receive ESL support as well as push-in, SETTS, and/or related services support, as mandated by their IEPs. Special education and general education teachers create IEPs that maximize academic potential in the least restrictive environment and minimize the impact of their disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In math and ELA we have grouped our ELL students in homogeneous groups based on past NYSESLAT test results and data collected from their teachers. In math, data is collected by EdPuzzle and Khan Academy in real time. Entering and Emerging ELLs and SWDs are then given enrichment assignments in their stand alone ENL classes and/or in SETTS classes. In ELA students have access to modified texts, graphic novels, books on tape, graphic organizers, etc. In addition to pull-out and push-in groups facilitated by the licensed ENL teacher, targeted Academic Intervention Services (AIS) in the content area are available to ELLs for support. AIS services are provided in English during optional lunch periods and optional after-school sessions by the content-area teacher and/or the licensed ENL teacher. Each content teacher also offers AIS services on designated days. Since we do not offer TBE or Dual Language programs, there is not native language instruction though native languages are supported through ELL access to bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, etc. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Next year the same programs and procedures will be continued. If we have beginner students a SIOP class will be created. We are planning on increasing the amount of training on differentiation and common core writing in the coming year. When we know the required needs of our incoming students, we will plan adjustments to our ELL program. One Licensed ENL teacher will attend a three-day Advanced Thinking Through Writing PD hosted by The Writing Revolution. This professional development focuses on the Hochman Method. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 CEP 57  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to any and all school programs including after-school electives. 100% of the ELLs are eligible to participate in a school club or campus athletic team of their choice each semester. ELLs also have access to participating in Navy JROTC. ELLs and their families are informed of these opportunities during Accepted Students Nights, Summer Bridge, Back to School Night, and parent conferences. All parental outreach is conducted in the parent's preferred language. All 9th grade ELLs also participate in the Restorative Circles and Peer Group Connections (PGC). All students may opt to also all participate in iMentor, starting their freshman year. ELLs have access to all after school enrichment classes and Regents prep classes that are offered either during lunch or after school. The ENL teachers also offer optional enrichment classes during lunch and after school. ELL participation in school programs is extremely high and ELLs are given the same opportunities for enrichment as all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms have Smartboards enabling teachers to incorporate more visuals. Each classroom also has computers with enough laptops for the entire class. There are four computer labs available for student use also. Laptops, computer labs, and library resources are available to students after school each day. Each classroom is equipped with ESL dictionaries, language dictionaries, and native language glossaries when available. Students have accounts on Castle Learning and regularly complete assignments and Regents preparation online. Many classes are using Google Classroom as well which includes the Read&Write literacy tool. This tool is helpful for both ELLs and ELL-SWDs because it offers bilingual translations, definitions in English, picture dictionaries, vocabulary list creation, read aloud support and annotation tools. Google classrooms are utilized across contents and grades. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is not provided for ENL students. All instruction is given in English. Students are encouraged to maintain literacy skills in their L1 outside of school. Spanish speaking students are also given the opportunity to take Spanish class at our school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As ELLs proceed to higher grades scaffolding is gradually removed as ELLs demonstrate growth. The 9th graders are given the most scaffolding and always have graphic organizers. They are given the most structure and guidance when explicitly teaching reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. In 10th grade, these supports are utilized slightly less if the students have demonstrated mastery of the skill or idea. In 12th grade, general education ELLs are given scaffolding upon request or after having demonstrated the need for it by struggling to complete the task. The school also utilizes curricula provided and approved by our Affinity network and New Visions for Public Schools, which provide grade appropriate resources and supports. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms have SmartBoards enabling teachers to incorporate more visuals. There are four computer labs available for student use also. Each classroom is equipped with ESL dictionaries, language dictionaries, and native language glossaries when available. Students have accounts on Castle Learning and regularly complete assignments and Regents preparation online. Many classes are using Google Classroom as well which includes the Read & Write literacy tool. This tool is helpful for both ELLs and ELL-SWDs because it offers bilingual translations, definitions in English, picture dictionaries, vocabulary list creation, read aloud support and annotation tools. Google classrooms are utilized across contents and grades. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a SummerBridge program to help introduce all students to high school expectations and procedures. This happens the week before school begins and helps all students, including ELLs, enter school with a familiarity of the setting. Though we rarely have new ELLs enroll throughout the school year, the guidance department (Margarita Fermin, Tania Cisneros, Anne 2018-19 CEP 58  Linder) and the ENL department (Sabrina Fouts, Francis Daniel, and Gloria Canales McCabe) would work closely with those students to facilitate their transition and offer academic and/or emotional support services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students are offered Spanish classes, including AP Spanish Language and Culture, as well as an opportunity to take the Spanish LOTE Regents Exam. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers attend professional development sessions at the school including departmental meetings on every extended-time Monday and Tuesday of the school year. Professional Development sessions are held the every other Tuesday of the month, while development in the departmental meetings are held once a week per department (this includes the English, Science and Social Studies departments). Additionally, on school-wide professional development days, all staff in all content areas receive professional development coordinated by our curriculum coach (Stephanie Aubry) and external sources. At these professional development sessions teachers develop Common Core rubrics for our school that are directly aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers provide professional development to the general education and SpEd teachers during these professional development sessions to ensure that everyone is receiving ELL training and develops an understanding of strategies and techniques to help ELLs in the general education classrooms and to help staff assist ELLs transition from middle school to high school. Records of these PDs are maintained by the ENL department, administration and curriculum coach. ENL teachers provide professional development to the guidance department to ensure that all proper procedures are followed when new students are being admitted so that any possible ELL will be brought to the attention of the ENL teachers who can proceed with the evaluation process already outlined in this document. Guidance counselors (Margarita Fermin, Tania Cisneros, Anne Linder) are also taught how to assist ELLs as they transition. School secretary (Peggy Alexander) and parent coordinator (Janet Tejada) also receive training in ELL student interaction. All teachers of ELLs are eligible to attend DOE and New Visions for Public Schools (Affinity Network partner) external professional developments in addition to the PDs specified in the previous question. These PDs focus on building ELL literacy. Techniques learned in the PDs are then brought back to the school, shared among the ENL department and, if applicable, the rest of the staff through in-house PDs, and are used to improve ELL engagement in the Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally this year, the ENL Department Chair will participate in a 3-day writing seminar at the Writing Revolution entitled Advanced Thinking Through Writing. This PD will focus on the Hochman Method in the areas of writing sentences, paragraphs, and compositions. This PD will be turn keyed to the other ENL teachers at the school to ensure all students are receiving such instruction. Special education teachers who service SETSS classes have also received training in the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System (LLI) to provide small group reading instruction for students requiring reading support. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL department hosts yearly PDs for teachers without ENL training. The PDs offer strategies and techniques to best address ELL difficulties and alert teachers to the struggles of ELLs. Guidance receives PDs informing them of the changes brought about by NYS CR Part 154 to ensure that all ELL rights are being upheld. The instructional coach maintains a binder of the agendas and attendance sheets for all professional developments and ensures that all teachers meet the professional development requirements. These PDs include instruction best practices for co-teaching and teaching ELLs, language acquisition, content instruction for ELLs with vocabulary support, etc. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? IEP meetings are held in accordance with the guidelines on each student's IEP. There are several Special Education Teachers who are bilingual and are available to translate. External interpretation services provided by the DOE are also utilized to interact with parents whose languages are not spoken by members of our staff. Our school has a full time bilingual psychologist as well. All documentation is maintained on SESIS. Additionally, ENL teachers meet with parents of ELLs to explain the freestanding ENL program offered at the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are contacted by the ENL department to invite them to all parent events including the four parent teacher conferences and ELL parent meetings throughout the year with translation services available from the DOE or from bilingual staff. We have parent workshops (understanding ENL, computer literacy for bilingual parents ), a bilingual parent coordinator, Janet Tejada, who acts as a liaison between parents and the school, facilitates workshops, coordinates parent events, translate and interpret for Spanish speaking parents, assist the parent teacher association and SLT, work with attendance committee, arrange awards and celebratory activities and holiday celebrations for families and parents. The parent association is involved in raising money for the senior dues through potlucks and bake sales. Parents are also invited to attend all school field trips and all school events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joshua Solomon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Business of Sports School School DBN: 02M393 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joshua Solomon Title Principal Rinah Fernandez Assistant Principal Janet Tejada Parent Coordinator Sabrina Fouts ENL/Bilingual Teacher Eunece Paul Parent Francis Daniel Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Aubry N/A Coach Coach Margarita Fermin School Counselor Donald Conyers Jamie Baez N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 N/A 9/15/17 N/A 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M393 School Name: Business of Sports School Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sabrina Fouts ENL Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the registration process, each family is asked to inform us of the language in which they would like to receive written communications if available. This is done through the telephone translation provided by the DOE, if needed. The school’s bilingual Parent Coordinator also speaks to parents that come to the office and asks them about language preferences, when appropriate. Approximately 60 families require translation or interpretation services, primarily in Spanish. Prior to enrollment the ENL teachers meet with all of the students’ parents each year share the information through video presentations available in different languages. They note the parents’ preferred languages and pass this information on to the pupil accounting secretary who then checks the records to ensure that we have the correct preferred language on record. The ENL teachers, guidance counselors and classroom teachers also have access to the students' language information on PupilPath to ensure that all communication is disseminated in the preferred language. Upon the parents' request, their preferred language can be changed. The PTA executive board and officers, as well as our Title 1 committee officers, are aware of the availability of translation and oral interpretation services provided through the DOE. They have been encouraged and assisted by the administration and Parent Coordinator to use these services as needed. The parent leadership 2018-19 CEP 63  is also very actively involved with the different language groups in our community, primarily Spanish. They provide us with valuable information from the groups in terms of their needs for translation or oral interpretation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish NAHUATL FRENCH AFRIKAANS ALBANIAN ARABIC BIHARI CHINESE ANY FRENCH FULANI HINDI MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) PORTUGUESE SENUFO TIBETAN URDU 485 229 4 3 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 0 1 65.81 31.07 0.54 0.41 0 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.41 0.21 0.21 0.41 0.21 0.21 0 0.21 483 231 3 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 0 2 1 1 1 1 65.54 31.34 0.41 0.41 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 0 0.41 0.21 0.21 0.21 0.21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 64  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families BOSS Weekly Bulletin Weekly on Sunday nights Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated into Spanish by school staff and Google Translate After-school program information Beginning of each semester Translated by Parent Coordinator NYSELAT and Regents testing dates and information Mailed the last week of April Translated by Language Access Coordinator Parent-teacher conference announcements Mailed and emailed before each conference date Translated by Parent Coordinator 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent-teacher conferences (November, March, and May) and curriculum nights (September). plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translation by LAC Coordinator and Parent Coordinator, as well as bilingual Guidance Counselor. If there aren't enough staff who speak the other languages, we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All emails, texts and calls are translated using School Messenger and Google Translate. Parent Coordinator and School Aide answer phone calls in Spanish and English. For other languages (Afrikaans, Albanian, Arabic, Bihari, Chinese, 2018-19 CEP 65  French, Fulani, Hindi, Mandinka, Nahuatl, Portuguese, Senufo, Tibetan, and Urdu), we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We use Monday professional development meetings led by our Language Access Coordinator. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school complies with Regulation A-663. At the start of each semester, we mail notification letters to parents so that they know that translation services are available if needed. All the documents above are available in multiple languages on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school uses feedback form the parent surveys to receive information about the quality and availability of services. The Parent Association also works with the Parent Coordinator to suggest and implement services that would benefit parents. We provide surveys translate surveys to Spanish in house and then use the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translating surveys to other languages. 2018-19 CEP 66 
