2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M394 School Name: EMMA LAZARUS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MELODY KELLOGG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Emma Lazarus High School 02M394 School Number (DBN): 310200011394 9-12 100 Hester St ., New York, NY 10002 212-925-5017 Phone Number: 212-925-5920 Fax: Melody Kellogg MDkello@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Melody Kellogg Bryan McGuinness Jennifer Ocasio Stacy Shau Jean Alegrand GanaelFontin AzizbekSarimsakov N/A District Information Geographical District: 79 Superintendent’s Office Address: Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 1150 East New York Ave, 1st floor, Brooklyn, NY PRotond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1742 Phone Number: 646-654-1261 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave, 8 th floor ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-339-1765 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melody Kellogg Bryan McGuinness Jennifer Ocasio Jean Alegrand GanaelFontin AzizbekSarimsakov FernandeGernier Gladys Tilhomme NamitaNeogi *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Stacy Shau Mark Stahl Elaine Law Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Staff/SLT Chairperson Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of ELHS is “To provide a safe, secure and academically rigorous environment to second language learners. Graduating students will be bilingual and uniquely qualified to enter the world of work.” 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Emma Lazarus High School for English Language Scholars (ELHS) is a transfer school comprised totally of second language learners. The school opened in 2009 and is in its tenth year of operation. Emma Lazarus High School's mission is to meet the needs of older ELL students. Students entering ELHS are ethnically diverse and all receive mandated ELL services. The school is designed to support students in language acquisition and to create an environment where students feel safe, supported and intellectually challenged. To accomplish this, we have strategic partnerships with the New York City Mission Society's Learning to Work Program, Lincoln Center's LEAD program, The New York City Horticultural Society, and TADA! Youth Theater. Alongside these partnerships, we integrate FuelEd and the Department of Education initiatives AP for All, College Access for All and Computer Science for All into our curriculum to ensure equity and excellence for all of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Entering students range between sixteen and twenty years of age and the average English as a Second Language (ESL) entry level is beginner (entering). Currently there are eighteen different languages represented at ELHS. The model of instruction is English immersion and the curriculum includes free standing ESL classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reviewing our past year through the lens of the Framework for Great Schools, the primary areas of focus were to continue to make rigorous instruction a priority, specifically in the area of differentiation with the highest and lowest achieving students in mind. We are simultaneously focused on collaboration and effective leadership as linked areas in improving student outcomes. In the upcoming year it is our intention to engage in cycles of learning as a way to continue deepening our understanding of rigorous instruction in the classroom, with a focus on assessment of and feedback to students. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M394 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 296 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 89.2% % Reduced Lunch 80.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.7% 33.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.16 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 59% 65% 45.4% 26.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 1 92.3% 6.8% 0.0% 10.1% 45.3% 2.7% 4 40% 3.8 N/A N/A 75% 60% 58.6% 22% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A YES YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers of all subjects reported that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text and academic language. 96% of students say that “they are learning a lot in their classes to prepare them for the next level,” and 92% of students said “that teachers want students to become better thinkers.” During the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day, teachers reported that they felt the work done around skill based instruction and UBD planning promoted rigorous instruction across the school. After reviewing trends and patterns in data, there appears to be a need in the area of instructional assessment and feedback in order to ensure student learning is being supported and challenged at an appropriate level. The 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide indicated that 29% of students did not feel challenged in their classes and the 23% of students reported that teachers do not notice when they have trouble learning something. From our 2017-2018 Quality Review, it was found that written feedback was not always connected to lesson or project criteria and rubrics and that rubrics were not being used as effectively as possible. Moreover, during the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day, teachers expressed their desire to continue the UBD planning work that we started this year, specifically with regard to UBD Stages 2 (Evidence) and 3 (Learning Plan). Teachers also consistently expressed wanting to continue the work of embedding skills and content across curriculums during their End of Year Conferences with the principal in order to further student learning supports. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, all teachers will have engaged in 3 cycles of learning focused around assessment and feedback, documented in the development of UBD Stages 2 and 3 of unit plans and resulting in a 5% increase in positive responses with regard to Academic Press on the Student School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development focused around assessment and feedback and the development of UBD Stages 2 and 3 of unit plans. Teachers, Administration PD Meetings to occur weekly from September 2018-June 2019, PD held for whole staff to occur from 2:45 – 4:00 every Monday from September 2018 - June 2019 Sharing of student work in cycles of learning as evidence of student growth. Teachers, ENL students, lowest third performing ENLs PD held for whole staff to occur from 2:45 – 4:00 every Monday from September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Kellogg, AP Heckethorn, and the Professional Development (PD) Committee will oversee the direction of PD with regard to our goal, as part of the work done with an external PD developer, Kristina Doubet. The PD committee will oversee the activities during weekly PD planning meetings. All instructional staff will implement the strategies in their classrooms and will receive feedback on implementation from administration, coaches, and colleagues during classroom visits. All teachers will embed strategies from PD into their unit, weekly, and daily plans. Teachers will document strategies taken to respond to the specific needs of struggling students and make 2018-19 CEP 13  Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) consultant will provide support and feedback regarding classroom practice and curricular adjustments, with a focus on assessment and feedback. November 6 and 7 2018, June 6 2019 Teachers, Administration, ENL students, lowest third performing ENLs Instructional coaching will be provided by administrative staff, Model Teacher (MT) and Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT). Teachers, Administration September 2018-June 2019 recommendations for our highest performing students. Principal Kellogg, AP Heckethorn, and PD committee will oversee the submission of the planning documents that embed plans for assessment, differentiation, and project-based learning. Principal Kellogg and AP Heckethorn will work with the ASCD consultant, Kristina Doubet, throughout the year to set instructional priorities and oversee progress. The consultant will work with the PD committee and teachers to embed specific differentiation strategies and provide feedback. Teachers will implement the strategies and make adjustments according to feedback. Principal Kellogg and AP Heckethorn will oversee the instructional coaching to ensure it is addressing specific teacher needs and working towards instructional goals. Lead teachers will engage in focused coaching with 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement teachers around instructional goals. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement begins at intake for all of our students. During intake, our school mission and college and career readiness expectations are made clear to families. Throughout the year, these ideals are constantly reinforced in the classroom by teachers and in advisories by advisors. Teachers will reach out to families using Kinvolved during their weekly mandated parent outreach time to keep families informed of their child’s progress and how to support their child at home. Finally, in September and May, families will receive information regarding curricula for their child, outlining course objectives, expectations and resources for support during family curriculum night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Achieving this goal will require the participation of administration and all instructional staff. Additionally, an Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) consultant will serve as an external professional development resource. Per session will be made available for teachers to work on curriculum during after school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, all teachers will have engaged in the first two cycles of learning focused around assessment and feedback, documented in the development of UBD Stages 2 and 3 of unit plans and resulting in a 5% increase in positive responses with regard to Academic Press on the Student School Survey. We will engage in a mid-year review of planning documents. At this midpoint, all teachers will present evidence of student work analysis and demonstrate how they have systematically used assessments and feedback to increase student learning, specifically with our lowest third performing ENLs. The instruments used to measure student impact and learning will be lowest third failure rates, Regents data and internal reading and writing diagnostics. This work will be tethered to current research and documented in shared online resources, such as Google docs. The coaching staff will have a weekly check-in of UBD Stages 2 and 3 unit planning, beginning in September and continuing through the end of June. Classroom visits, collaboration and days to observe the Peer Collaborative and Model teachers will be documented on our school and PD calendars. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Engrade (online) gradebook, failure rates, Regents passage rates, NYSESLAT scores, internal reading and writing diagnostics, student drop-out rates, college application and acceptance rates, student and teacher surveys. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide, 91% of students reported positively under “Peer Support for Academic Work,” and 94% reported positively under “Guidance.” Teachers reported 100% of students follow rules, pay attention, do their work and behave well in class. Over 96% of students reported that “they feel safe in their classes” and “in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria.” During the 2018 Spring Chancellor’s Day, teachers cited Advisories, tutoring, trips, PM school and sports teams as evidence of a supportive environment at the school. For our 2017 – 2018 Quality Review, we received Well Developed for School Culture indicators. The priority need that arise from data patterns and trends are increased collaboration between instructional staff and advisors to more fully support our SIFE population. During End of Year Conferences with the Principal, teachers consistently asked for more Professional Development around how to identify gaps and support students with interrupted formal education. Teachers also indicated the need for more structured check-ins between teachers and advisors. 24% of students reported that teachers do not support them when they are upset and 23% of students reported that teachers do not notice when they have trouble learning something. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and advisors will have met at the end of each marking period to discuss student issues and instructional supports, with particular focus on our SIFE and lowest period third populations, documented in collaborative action plans and resulting in 75% of our SIFE and lowest third populations passing at least one New York State Regent exam for which they are eligible. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will identify SIFE and lowest third populations, to be shared with teachers and advisors, with accompanying data. SIFE and lowest third populations Embedded within the 2018 – 2019 Professional Development for the school will be strategies to support teachers in addressing the gaps in student learning, specifically with regard to our SIFE and lowest third populations. SIFE and lowest third populations Advisors and teachers will meet at the end of each marking period to discuss the progress being made by our SIFE and lowest third populations and present strategies for supporting these students. SIFE and lowest third populations Advisors and teachers will consistently add to and review collaborative action plans (a Google spreadsheet) to document actions taken, family outreach and contact, and issues pertaining to our SIFE and lowest third populations. SIFE and lowest third populations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Guidance counselors (Stacy Shau and Francesca Rosa) will oversee and teachers will support in implementation. Assistant principals will oversee the gathering and presentation of data for review. Administration will oversee the schedule and structure for meetings during Collaboration or PD. September 2018, February 2019, June 2019 Beginning in September 2018 and embedded in weekly PDs throughout the year October 2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, April 2019, June 2019 Beginning in September and ongoing throughout the year. Teachers and advisors will oversee the maintenance of the collaborative action plans. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement begins at intake for all of our students. During intake, our school mission and college and career readiness expectations are made clear to families. Throughout the year, these ideals are constantly reinforced in the classroom by teachers and in advisories by advisors. Advisors make contact with their advisees’ families throughout 2018-19 CEP 18  the year to make them aware of upcoming trips and behavioral or academic concerns. Teachers are expected to reach out to families during their designated parent outreach time and in addition, with the introduction of the Collaborative Action Plans, teachers and advisors will be able to make notes of interactions and communications with the student and/or family. Meetings between the advisors and teachers will serve to facilitate communication about the student and provide insight into academic progress and socio-emotional issues for all staff involved in providing direct support to the student. These meetings will formally take place once at the end of each marking period, but the collaborative action plans will serve as a tool for constant updates between these meetings. At the end of the first and second semesters we will review the progress made by our SIFE and lowest third populations by examining class and Regents pass rates and gains. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance counselors, teachers, Learning to Work (LTW), advisors and administrators will be leveraged to achieve this goal. Per Session will be made available to teachers who want to provide academic tutoring classes afterschool to support struggling students. Additional resources necessary to support acculturation trips and school-wide community building activities will be purchased to support students socio-emotionally. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers and advisors will have met at the end of each marking period during the first semester to discuss student issues and instructional supports, with particular focus on our SIFE and lowest period third populations, documented in collaborative action plans.. The instrument of measure will be students’ report cards and January Regents pass rates for which our SIFE and lowest third performing students are eligible. As a midpoint check-in, teachers and advisors will review collaborative action plans and students’ academic progress in classes. Teachers and advisors will hold conferences with the students to review progress, engage in reflection and goal setting and outlining next steps as necessary, all of which will be documented in the collaborative action plan. Additionally, students targeted for PM school support will be monitored for academic growth through examination of student work and overall movement on specifically designed assessments administered in the classes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work, Engrade (online) gradebook, student surveys, collaborative action plans, school wide events calendar. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers reported that “teachers feel responsible that all students learn,” 95% of teachers said that they are “actively trying to improve their teaching,” and 95% of teachers said they, “talk to one another about instruction.” Teachers also cited intervisitations and structured collaboration time as systems that promote collaborative teaching. Priority needs that will be addressed with regard to Collaborative Teachers, as indicated by trends and patterns in data, will be the continuation of structured time to work on the development of cross curricular units and spiraling of skills throughout levels and across content. The school’s 2017-2018 Quality Review identified the school as “Proficient” for Indicator 4.2 (Teacher teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice). Also, 37% of teachers, according to the School Survey Guide, reported that “their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas.” Teachers expressed similar feelings during End of Year Conferences held with the Principal, saying that they would like to continue to work on cross curricular planning with regard to skills and content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have planned and implemented one cross curricular unit for each semester, evidenced by unit plans in UBD format, and resulting in an average of 10% gains (against baseline assessments aligned to Common Core Standards or the school’s internal benchmarks) for those specific units for students performing in the lowest third of the school. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Embedded within the 2018 – 2019 Professional Development for the school will be time to develop UBD Stages 2 and 3 of unit plans. As a part of this time, teachers will be given time to work in teams to create projects that embed cross curricular content or skills. These unit plans will be tethered to the book Using Understanding by Design in the Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Classroom by Heineke and McTighe. This will further our cultural relevancy and racial equity work. All students, specifically students performing in the lowest third Teachers will use weekly designated collaboration time to work, reflect and receive feedback on these cross curricular units in their self-selected teacher teams. All students, specifically students performing in the lowest third PD Meetings to occur weekly from September 2018-June 2019, PD held for whole staff to occur from 2:45 – 4:00 every Monday from September 2018 - June 2019 Collaboration time will held for whole staff to occur from xx:xx – xx:xx every Tuesday from September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher teams will engage in intervisitations for the purposes of observation and feedback on their planned cross curricular units. All students, specifically students performing in the lowest third Intervisitations will be team specific, with the expectation that at least one Principal Kellogg, AP Heckethorn, and the Professional Development (PD) Committee will oversee the direction of PD with regard to the goal. All instructional staff will units in their classrooms and will receive feedback on implementation from teacher teams, administration and coaches. Administration and PD Committee will oversee the structure of intervisitations. Each teacher team will choose one designated facilitator. The designated facilitator will communicate with administration regarding feedback and progress. Teacher teams will schedule intervistations and make administration aware. Administration will 2018-19 CEP 21 Teachers teams will examine students’ work from cross curricular units to evaluate how student performance in these units compared to baseline assessments (aligned to Regents or school internal benchmarks). All students, specifically students performing in the lowest third intervisitation occurs each semester for each team, beginning in October 2018 Collaboration time will held for whole staff to occur from xx:xx – xx:xx every Tuesday from September 2018 – June 2019 provide coverages as necessary. Administration and PD Committee will oversee the structure for evaluation and review. Teacher teams will engage in the process and feedback to instructional staff during designated PD days. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the start of each semester, teachers will share syllabi outlining the objectives of their courses. During Parent Conferences in the fall and spring, teachers will speak with parents about student progress, strengths and weaknesses as they pertain to specific units, discuss actions being taken to support students and present student work with feedback. Additionally, as specific students or groups of students’ assessments are examined in teacher teams, teachers will reach out to their respective families to make them aware of student progress. Administration, teachers and the parent coordinator will be key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight of these activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, teacher teams will have designated time during professional development and contractual collaboration time to create, review, implement and reflect on cross-curricular units. If teacher teams determine a need for additional meeting time to complete units, per session will be made available.To support intervisitations, substitutes may be used for coverages if the need arises. External professional development and training will be made available as the need and opportunities arise. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  By February 2019, all teachers will have planned and implemented one cross curricular unit for the fall semester, evidenced by unit plans in UBD format, and resulting in an average of 10% gains (against baseline assessments aligned to Common Core Standards or the school’s internal benchmarks) for those specific units for students performing in the lowest third of the school. As a mid-point benchmark, teacher teams will present and reflect on how planning of cross curricular units contributed to gains in student achievement. The instruments of measure will be summative assessments given at the conclusion of implemented cross curricular units, compared to baseline assessments aligned to Common Core Standards or the school’s internal benchmarks given at the start of the unit. In addition, January 2019 Regents data in comparison to June 2018 Regents data will be examined for classes culminating in a Regent exam. The June 2019 presentation will culminate in a presentation of details about how their cross curricular units were designed, what evidence they have to indicate progress towards achieving the goal, and implications and considerations for future planning of cross curricular units. Lastly, these unit plans will be tethered to the book Using Understanding by Design in the Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Classroom by Heineke and McTighe. This will further our cultural relevancy and racial equity work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Engrade (online) gradebook, student work, failure rates, Regents passage rates, NYSESLAT scores, student drop-out rates, college application and acceptance rates, student and teacher surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers consistently reported that administrative coaching of teachers and the establishment of the Principal’s Cabinet this year as being a strength during the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day. 96% of parents responded positively to inclusive leadership on the 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide and 89% of teachers reported that “the principal sets high standards for student learning” and that she makes her “expectations clear for meeting instructional goals.” One area that was consistently identified during the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day as an area to be addressed was the level of communication and transparency that currently exists in the school. Teachers expressed wanting to have more communication regarding student and school progress, systems and events. This aligned with the 2017 – 2018 Proficient rating on the Quality Review for Indicator 3.1 (School level theory of action and goals understood and supported by the school community). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative team will increase communication and supports for professional growth by restructuring the Principal’s cabinet with the addition of more systems and forums for school-wide discussions of school progress, upcoming events and professional development, documented in a school wide calendar and meeting agendas and resulting in 10% gains in instructional leadership on the School Quality Guide for 2018 – 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School based team stakeholders will meet with the principal once a month to share progress, support collaboration, and transparency between teams and school leadership, and to discuss how work being done aligns with the school’s mission and goals. Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Learning to Work Director The principal will hold forums once a marking period with the whole staff to report on the school’s progress, student issues and concerns, family issues and concerns and to make staff aware of upcoming events for feedback. All staff A designated staff member will maintain a calendar of school events and send daily emails with pertinent information regarding upcoming events, student and family activities, external PD opportunities and new student intake to all staff. All staff Administration, identified school based team stakeholders, LTW director, guidance counselor, parent coordinator and office manager Principal Kellogg with support from administrative team Designated staff member September 2018, October 2018, November 2018, December 2018, January 2019, February 2019, March 2019, April 2019, May 2019, June 2019 October 2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, April 2019, June 2019 Daily and on an as needed basis, beginning in September 2018 and continuing throughout the year Teachers, guidance counselors and administrative staff who attend external professional development, trainings and conferences will turnkey their experiences during a scheduled All pedagogues and administrators January 2019 and May 2019 Professional development committee 2018-19 CEP 25 Professional Development session once a semester using an assigned protocol and structure. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will present an overview of the work being done by school-based teams at Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and Site Leadership Team (SLT) meetings to effectively communicate how the work teams are aligned to the school’s mission, goals, and instructional foci for the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, administration will leverage all staff as members of a school-based team. School-based teams will meet at least weekly during designated meeting times that accommodate their schedules. External professional development and training will be made available as the need and opportunities arise. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative team will increase communication and supports for professional growth by restructuring the Principal’s cabinet with the addition of more systems and forums for school-wide discussions of school progress, upcoming events and professional development, documented in a school wide calendar and meeting agendas and resulting in 10% gains in instructional leadership on the School Quality Guide for 2018 – 2019. The February cabinet meeting will serve as a mid-point benchmark to see if facilitators are making progress with their teams and feedback from teams on how they feel they may be better supported. An informal survey will also be given to all staff for feedback on newly established systems for communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student survey, Staff survey, Engrade (online) gradebook, student work, facilitator feedback, agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 -2018 School Quality Guide, 97% of families said that “they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school” and 97% of families said that “teachers work closely with them to meet their child’s needs.” 95% of teachers said that “teachers at this school understand families’ problems and concerns.” Information gathered from teachers during the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day indicated that the use of Kinvolved supports their abilities to contact parents regularly and that Parent Conferences try to welcome and support our ENL parent population. Data from the 2017 – 2018 School Quality Guide highlights a pattern in opportunities being offered to families at the school. 47% of teachers felt that families had the opportunity to “visit their child’s classroom” or participate in “an activity with their child.” Feedback from teachers from the Spring 2018 Chancellor’s Day was to increase opportunities and access to school events and information for parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, we will increase the number of family and community events by 20% in our school by having key identified staff support or oversee at least one family event, initiative or outreach opportunity, and by increasing collaboration and supports throughout the year with our Parent Teacher Association (PTA). 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and advisers will support our parent coordinator in planning family and community events in addition to regular PTA meetings. They will meet in teams to plan and implement activities throughout the year, documenting parent attendance and targeting parents who have not yet attended a school function. Families of all students Teachers will use their parent outreach period to make connections with students and families, making them aware of their child’s progress and family and community opportunities. These connections will be made through Kinvolved, (web based and app based supports) and face to face meetings, as appropriate. Families of all students Advisers will meet with staff once a marking period during the professional development period to discuss student and family issues. Advisers will meet weekly to discuss student issues and concerns to organize outreach to families. Families of all students The parent coordinator will work with staff to coordinate and oversee the events. Administration will support the activities. Teachers will conduct parent and student outreach and document the contact made. Administration will oversee the activity. Full staff will participate in the activity. Monthly PTA meetings, monthly events, September 2018-June 2019 Weekly, September 2018-June 2019 Advisors and staff - six times a year, at the end of each marking period (October 2018, December 2018, January 2019, March 2019, April 2019, June 2019). Advisors - each Thursday throughout the year 2018-19 CEP 28 The administration and staff will collaborate to form and partner with new community organizations to help meet and support the school. Staff and community based organizations September 2017 -June 2018 Full staff will participate in the activity. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYC Mission Society's Learning to Work (LTW) program is integral to our advisory system and hence, important to our strengthening of family and community engagement. During monthly parent meetings, the Parent Coordinator and leadership will survey parents about concerns and outreach from teachers. Parent leaders will support the school by providing assistance with workshops and building capacity among our diverse families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all staff, parent outreach fliers and mailings, the purchasing of our phone system, advertisements, and brochures. Time will be built into our existing community schedule for staff discussion regarding student-family issues. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will increase the number of family and community events by 10% in our school by having key identified staff support or oversee at least one family event, initiative or outreach opportunity, and by increasing collaboration and supports throughout the year with our Parent Teacher Association (PTA). In February 2017, as a mid-point benchmark, we will review the relevant data to see how parent involvement has increased and to evaluate the success of new events and initiatives, making adjustments for the second half of the school year, as necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student survey, Google doc, parent outreach logs, parent conference sign-in sheets, and other community data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 116-Based on New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), Regent and class test scores. Mathematics 20-Based on Regent and class test scores. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 116-Small group, whole class instruction, teacher tutoring, peer-tutoring, lunch tutoring. 116-Day, tutoring, lunch & PM school program, Saturday classes and Regent prep program. 20-Small group, whole class instruction, tutoring, peer-tutoring, lunch and Saturday tutoring. 20-During day tutoring, lunch & PM school program, Saturday classes and Regent prep program. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 116-Supplemental language acquisition courses, small group tutoring, individual Rosetta Stone accounts; Achieve 3000 program implemented in to all classes as support, and reading room courses and resources. 20-Additional skills courses for struggling and identified students based on assessment examinations/ tutoring/ destination math/ after school support classes and teacher and peer tutoring. Science 19-Based on Regent and class test scores. 19-Small group tutoring. Social Studies 29- Based on Regent and class test scores. 29-Supplemental courses for students identified with low content knowledge and organization skills/additional classes for students 19-Teacher tutoring, peer-tutoring lunch and Saturday tutoring. 29-Tutoring, peer-tutoring, lunch and Saturday tutoring. 19-Scheduled day tutoring, lunch tutoring, and Saturday Regent prep program. 29-During day tutoring, lunch, PM school program, Saturday Regent prep program. 2018-19 CEP 30  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 225- Teachers’ referrals, family request and student’s request. in culminating Regents courses. 225-Individual counseling, group counseling or professional referrals. 225-Individual counseling, group counseling or professional referrals. 225-During the school day, before and after school and sometimes on weekends. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 0 – 2 students may reside in temporary housing throughout the school year. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with supplies such as clothing, school materials, books, transportation, basic emergency supplies and outreach in the form of educational and socio-emotional support services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment for highly qualified teachers occurs through the use of the open market system as well as the new teacher finder and word of mouth recruiting. The retention strategy includes a heavy focus on professional development teacher mentoring and coaching. Funds are allotted to support both new hires through on- site coaching. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development (PD) occurs weekly during the identified PD period. Additional supports occur through scheduled dates in August for teachers to provide a venue for early preparation and engagement with the Common Core. Throughout the year teachers’ have access to one full time coach as well as planning time for peer to peer collaboration. Teachers participate in the professional development planning and school wide instructional rounds. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers choose their own assessments specific to the benchmarks and outcomes associated with each class and the project they are engaging in. Much of the assessment is rubric based. Additionally, ENL teachers use pre and post testing Achieve 3000) to track Lexile movement. The New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) is used as an overarching assessment. Writing is assessed cross-curricular, based on spiraled tasks and an internally developed school wide rubric. Professional development sessions have focused on reviewing student work through the lens of assessment; peer evaluation and feedback on class specific assessments; and analysis of data gathered through varied assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A - 3a, 3b, 5b - 4a, 5C - 4a Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal 168,082.00 0 27,214.00 x 2018-19 CEP 35  Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,218,406.00 x x Section5A - 3a Sections 5A - 3a, 3b, 5b - 4a, 5C - 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 36   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Emma Lazarus High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 38  Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 39   hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Emma Lazarus High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables participating students to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards by:  Continuing to expand existing supports to engage students in reading and writing;  Provide intensive professional development using both internal (Principal, Asst. Principals, coaches) and  external resources such as staff developers; Inclusion of all components of a balanced literacy program: Independent Reading; independent writing; shared reading; interactive writing; read aloud; word study; guided reading; double period literature blocks; and literature circles;  Provide both day and after school tutorials for students;  Provide ELL students with materials in their native language;  Use technology to engage and support students language acquisition, and  Provide the highest quality education to all of our students. Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual student’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held:  On September 21, October 19, November 16, December 21, 2017; January 18, February 15, March 15, April 20, May 17 and June 21, 2018. Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 40  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents with frequent reports on their child’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows:  Report cards will be given six times a year;  Teachers are available as needed to meet with the parents;  Parents are encouraged to communicate with the Parent Coordinator for the interim updates, and  Advisors will regularly outreach to parents as well attendance and guidance staff. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for scheduled appointments and open school sessions. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s education, and to observe their child’s class. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parent Responsibilities Emma Lazarus High School parents will: A. Support my child’s learning by making education a priority by:  Making sure that he/she comes to school every day on time;  Making sure that all homework assignments and school projects are completed on time;  Providing an environment conducive for study at home;  Monitoring the amount of time your child spends watching television and on the computer doing non-school related activity, and  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility. B. Volunteer in my child’s classroom. C. Participate as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education. D. Participate in school activities on a regular basis. 2018-19 CEP 41  E. Stay informed about my child’s education and communicates with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and respond as appropriate. F. Provide my child with a library card. G. Communicate positive values character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility. H. Respect the cultural differences of others. I. Help my child accept consequences for negative behavior. J. Be aware of and follow the rules and regulations of the school and district. K. Support the school’s discipline policy. L. Express high expectations and offer praise and encouragement for their achievement. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities Emma Lazarus High School students will: A. Attend school regularly and arrive on time. B. Complete all assignments and submit them on time. C. Follow all school rules and be responsible for their own actions. D. Show respect for themselves, others and property. E. Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. F. Always try my best and enjoy the learning process. 2018-19 CEP 42  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III LEP program is used for supplemental services for our ELL population by providing targeted supports in English language development and content area achievement. The Title III supplemental program supports students in ENL and the content areas during after school hours throughout the week and on select Saturdays. For ENL supplemental programs, students are grouped according to their ENL levels, as evidenced by their performance on the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, our own internal intake exams, and performance in ENL classes. For content specific after school classes and Saturday sessions, students are grouped by content area. No class will exceed 34 ELL students and all instruction is delivered in English. The rationale for the ENL after school program is to enrich English language acquisition through targeted instruction for our Entering (EN) and Emerging (EM) ELL students by providing language instruction that targets academic content and vocabulary. Internal data indicates that our newcomer EN and EM ELL students come in with extremely varied levels of English language acquisition across the four modalities (reading, writing, speaking, and listening). The purpose of the after school program is to target these students and provide additional exposure to English and time on task outside of the regular day program. The after school program identifies gaps in learning and targets instruction to support students to improve outcomes. The after school Title III program begins on September 19 and will end on January 17, the spring semester will start on February 6 and will end on June 5, 2019. These ENL supplemental classes are offered two days a week on Wednesday and Thursday from 2:50 until 4:20 p.m. Each semester, the two after school ENL classes will target approximately 40 students. There are rotating ENL certified teachers teaching the after school class each semester, utilizing teacher created materials, Rosetta Stone and class sets of books geared toward beginner English language acquisition and development. Additional workbooks will be purchased to supplement our Keystone, Edge and other ENL book series. The workbooks are consumables and are used in our after school supplemental classes for additional curricular supports. The spring after school ENL supplemental classes will mirror the fall offering in terms of schedule, duration, materials used, and students served. The rationale for the math after school program is to target and support ELL students (Entering to Expanding) identified as struggling in foundational math skills and are not ready to handle high school algebra. Internal data indicates that our newcomer EN and EM ELL students enter our school well below grade level in mathematics. The purpose of the after school program is to target these students and provide additional exposure and time on task to build and reinforce their foundational math skills. The math supplemental class is offered on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:50 until 4:20 p.m. and begins on September 19 and will end on January 17, the spring semester will start on February 6 and will end on June 5, 2019. Each semester, the after school math supplemental class will target approximately 30 students, with ENL levels ranging from Entering (EN) to Expanding (EX). There is one math certified and one ENL certified teacher who plan and teach the class, utilizing teacher created materials. The class will target academic vocabulary and literacy as well as math. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The rationale for the Saturday sessions is to support and supplement ELL students (Entering to Expanding) in Regents culminating classes as needed; however, this will not be test preparation but rather focused on literacy gaps in students that are preparing to take Regents exams. In addition to the content delivered during the regular day program, our data indicates that students need to increase literacy skills in preparation for college readiness. They need additional support with academic vocabulary and skills now required on the common core aligned exams. There will be 12 Saturday sessions held this school year, six sessions in the fall and six in the spring. There will be five teachers in fall and eight teachers in the spring. Each session will run from 9 a.m. until 2 p.m. and the sessions necessitate seven teacher positions. The program in the fall will be held on December 1, 8, 15, and January 5, 12, 19 and has an anticipated enrollment of 150 ELL students, ranging from Entering (EN) to Expanding (EX). The fall Saturday sessions will support the content areas of: Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, Living Environment, Earth Science, and English and will be taught by six content teachers: three certified in math, two certified in science and three certified in ENL/English language arts. The spring Saturday sessions will mirror the fall supplemental Saturday sessions in terms of schedule, duration and students served, with the addition of two certified Social Studies teachers to offer support in U.S. History and Global Studies. The spring sessions will be held on May 4, 11, 18, and June 1, 8, and 15. The Title III program will support the teachers that are dually certified in English/ENL and Social Studies/ENL; otherwise ENL teacher will support the Saturday program. Any teacher created materials will not be purchased with Title III funds; however, sessions that are building students’ academic vocabulary and content knowledge and skills will be funded by Title III. Lastly, 100% of the time used for the after school and Saturday sessions will be direct instruction for ELLs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our data indicates that our ELLs performing in the lowest third need additional supports to engage in higher order tasks while our highest performing ELLs need to be continuously challenged in the classroom. In response, our CEP goal for "Rigorous Instruction" this school year focuses "on designing differentiated tasks based on student work analysis for the purpose of providing appropriate challenge to our highest and lowest performing students, evidenced by task, lesson and unit designs, individualized action plans and programmatic decisions with a college readiness focus." In addition, we will continue to look at how cross-curricular support and skill building support ELLs. All of our students are learning English as a new language to varying degrees and our Title III supplemental programs are in direct response to this needs based goal. To this end, the differentiation strategies embedded in our regular day ENL instruction and Title III supplemental programs are meant to address the needs of our ELL students who have been identified as struggling in language development and/or content area achievement. Currently, approximately 75% of our students are identified as Entering (EN) to Expanding (EX) ELLs, and approximately 13% having tested as Commanding (CM) within the last two academic years. As a result, all teachers engage with professional development focused on delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. Our professional development model continues to be 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development consistent with prior years' structures, it is both on-going and intensive, and includes both on-site and off-site activities. On-site training is provided weekly on Mondays by the PD committee, led by Mark Stahl (lead teacher/ENL) and supported by Lucy Clark (ENL), Elaine Law (Social Studies/ENL), Roger Almeida (Science) and administration. The schedule of our Title III professional development series, led by our PD committee, is: developing best practices and looking at assessment for ELLs, Identifying critical skills for ELLs in the curriculum, differentiating project-based tasks for ELLs, Data based strategic groupings of ELLs for differentiation purposes, articulating clear learning goals for ELLs and looking at student work products to improve instruction. Specific dates that will include Title III planned professional development include, Monday, October 22, December 10, February 25, and March 11. This year, Kristina Doubet from ASCD will provide additional days of staff PD anchored to her book, "Differentiation in Middle and High School: Strategies to Engage All Learners" with a specific focus on how to differentiate for ELLs. In previous years, teachers have also attended off-site TESOL, ASCD and NCTM conferences to enrich their content and ESL practices and to turn-key new ideas and insights to the rest of the staff upon their return. Specific dates that will include Dr. Doubet are November 5, 6, and 7, also January 28 and May 6, 7, and 8. The professional development is held from 2:40 – 4:00 p.m. on Mondays. On November 6 and January 28, the professional development will be from 8:21 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Dr. Doubet will be no cost to Title III, but per session to work on curriculum and ELL supports will be scheduled from the Title III funds to support the professional development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: All of our students are second language learners, all activities are targeted to meet the needs of second language families and consequently, the needs of our families and parents continue to be specific to certain topics. Consolidated monies are used to support and promote parent support and community engagement through a series of activities. All of our families are the intended target population.One of the identified areas of need after surveying families is the desire to learn and improve their English. In response, we are offering after school workshops on language development that involve providing families with Rosetta Stone accounts and workshops will be scheduled on the first Wednesday of the month from 3:00 – 4:30 p.m. or later as parents schedules allow (October 3, November 7, December 5, January 2, February 5, March 6, April 3, May 1, and June 5). Our parent engagement activities include small workshops on technology offered by the parent coordinator, Karen Padilla. These small group workshops are offered also on the first Wednesday of every month from 4:30 – 5:30 p.m. The intent is to not only provide parents with English and technology supports, but also guide families on how to better support their child in their English language development. Three specific workshops to be held will be 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities October 23, on how to families can support their students when learning English, January 15, how families can support students to take Regent tests, and May 22 how families can prepare students to read and work over the summer on their language acquisition. These workshops will take place from 5:00 – 6:30 p.m. Other workshops that will specifically impact higher achievement for ELLs include presentations regarding college readiness and financial aid for ELLs. As recent immigrants, our parents find the college application process especially daunting. In response, we hold multiple workshops on the topic of college and career readiness for parents. These workshops will be held from 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m., on December 5 and again later in the spring and will be led by our college and career counselors, Francesca Rosa, Stacy (Yee) Shau, Jennifer Guzman, and Summer Nassar and supported by our administration.Finally, community and parent engagement will continue to be supported by the involvement of parents in excursions to plays, cultural and sporting events, as well as inclusion in our yearly celebrations (multicultural celebration/holiday program/ talent show/school musical). Our upcoming multicultural celebration on November 20 will provide parents and students an opportunity to share aspects of their culture in a format that supports and furthers the English language development of our ELLs. And on January 15 and again on June 13, parents will be encouraged to attend and support our school musical which is created, written and performed by our ELL students. This programming will be at no cost to the Title III program, but is supplementary for ELL and their families. The guidance counselors, Stacy Shau and Francesca Rosa, and identified teachers work on a rotating basis to provide translation and document interpretation as a means of engaging our multicultural population. Parent notification occurs through a variety of venues including direct phone outreach, mailed and backpacked letters, newsletters, and our phone messenger system, Kinvolved. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Conceptually Consolidated Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, 2018-19 CEP 47  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Emma Lazarus High School for English Lan Borough Manhattan School Number 394 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melody Kellogg Coach Viki Yang ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dustin Brumit Teacher/Subject Area Bryan McGuinness/Social Studie Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider New York City Mission Society Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Joel E. Heckethorn Coach Michael Giovacchini School Counselor Ms. Yee (Stacy) Shau Parent Ana Ordonez Parent Coordinator Saleha Khatun Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 306 Total number of ELLs 263 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 85.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use multiple assessment tools with our ELLs. Upon intake for every new immigrant student, a teacher created test focuses on evaluating students’ levels in reading, speaking and writing to allow for a subsequent ENL placement. Entering students are also tested with a teacher created math examination. Subsequent to this testing, teachers then engage students three times a year on a reading diagnostic utilizing Achieve 3000, which assigns a Lexile reading level for every student, and a rubric based writing diagnostic based on the NYSESLAT. Each time the students complete this diagnostic, teachers compare the results to a benchmark norm to make sure the placement is valid. Teachers maintain running records for this data and share with each other as a department. Teachers incorporate time in our collaborative periods to look at the data. Our PLC/inquiry teacher teams spend additional time examining student progress. A review of the initial data on students and their proficiency levels indicates patterns for growth in literacy with most estimated at a proficiency level of 2018-19 CEP 50  Entering or Emerging. While students test across the entire range on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, we continue to find ways to best support students with writing, reading, listening and speaking depending on the results. Assessment for literacy is also on going in all classes since we engage in a balanced literacy model. We use the assessments and curriculum-embedded data results to continuously tweak our curricula and courses for Ell's; finally, we use our professional development cycles to break down common core standards, Ell benchmarks and Regents' tasks to find additional supports to bolster student outcomes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The model at ELHS takes into account the need to maximize every moment of instructional time to allow students to develop their literacy skills in the short time available to them. In support of this need we incorporate strategies into all our content classes that will enhance and support reading, speaking, and writing proficiency. Using our internally created benchmarks, we are periodically assessing our students and for our ELL students and we are continually engaging in the development of authentic assessments that correspond to our ENL benchmarks (which were developed based on Common Core, state and city standards). Our school’s instructional plan involves scheduling students into one of several link courses – classes that focus on one of the ENL modalities (reading, writing, speaking, or listening). Students who are at the entering level take two link classes – one that concentrates on speaking and vocabulary, while the other one concentrates on writing and reading. In our levels 2, 3 and 4, students take link courses specific to writing, listening, or reading. Finally, our advance students take English classes that begin to prepare them for both the SAT and Regents. Our instructional plan also includes after school courses that afford students an additional class at their level for skill development and reinforcement. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We are monitoring and tracking student progress closely so that we are well informed of the progress being made by each student. Teacher do this by utilizing running records, portfolios and our online grade book, Engradepro.com. Through early identification and evaluation of students’ gaps, collaborative planning and preparation, guidance support services, and parent involvement, our school works on assisting all students as they progress toward completion of their high school diploma requirements. Students are assessed through a combination of assessments which include both internal (pre-post computerized and written assessors) and external assessments ( NYSESLAT/ Regents/ ). Teachers engage students three times a year on a reading diagnostic utilizing Achieve 3000, which assigns a Lexile reading level for every student, and a rubric based writing diagnostic based on the NYSESLAT. Each time the students complete this diagnostic, teachers compare the results to a benchmark norm to ensure that the curricula and instruction align to students' needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The first intervention is in each teachers' classroom, where all staff build in differentiated and scaffold supports to address interventions. The staff looks at our lowest performing and struggling students through a combination of summative data taken from diagnostic exams, class assessments, and performance tasks regularly during professional development and collaborative periods. Additionally, we have tutoring offered during the school hours and we offer after school skills class in ENL, math and science to bridge the gap in content and language acquisition. Finally, we consistently involve family in the process when students struggle by reaching out and meeting with families. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We are discussing NYSESLAT, NYSISTELL and our diagnostic outcome data collaboratively and as a school community we are examining our instructional practices, including assessments, to ensure that we are moving our students towards graduation, Regents passage and ultimately English proficiency. We use the data to set both short term and long term goals for continuous improvement. The data suggests that we need to continue to monitor students’ performance on listening/reading and reading/writing assessments to place them in correct courses and tutoring. We continue to look at the courses and embed instruction that address the students’ weaknesses on the various parts of the exams. We collaborate as a staff to 2018-19 CEP 51  examine this data and inform our instructional practices. Our lead teachers and administration are designing professional development around the instruction in the classroom. We consistently monitor teachers and their instruction to ensure that we are embedding strategies and supports that are indicated as weaknesses in students outcomes on the assessments. We are also very well aware of the core curriculum standards and exams and are embedding them into our instruction. We know that new challenges will arise in the coming years as we continue to unpack the Common Core standards and embed the tasks into our instruction. As we continue to disaggregate the data, our decisions and instruction will be directly impacted and correlated to the results that we find. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As a staff we routinely examine the results of the NYSESLAT data in our September meetings to identify trends. Use of this data as well the NYSITELL data is used to inform our instruction, identify students for tutoring and provide information on individual student strengths and needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Since the school is a transfer school, student classes are assigned based on needs for graduation. ENL classes are sequenced one through 7 ( beginner to advanced) and students are placed based on proficiency level. We are a stand-alone model where students receive the required course and minutes dependent upon the level. (Beginner for instance has 4 classes of ENL/ELA up to advanced that have 2 classes of ENL/ELA) Our entire schools is ENL and therefore many of our teachers are dually certified; students receive content through the lens of ENL. All staff receive professional development to support integration of literacy into lessons. For ENL, students are grouped based on the intake test results, NYSISTELL, and NYSESLAT data. For all content courses, students are grouped based on their individual ability level and graduation requirements. Professional development has addressed differentiation to support teachers with how best to support various language abilities in the classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in Entering ENL classes receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week, 2 units of ENL and 1 unit of ELA; an ENL certified teacher is assigned to all of our stand-alone courses. We have seven certified ENL and three are dually certified ENL and content teachers. At ELHS, students are often programmed for one additional unit of ENL. Students in Emerging or Transitioning ENL classes receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, usually 2 units of ENL and 1 unit of ELA, and Expanding and Commanding ENL students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week and up to 2 units of ELA; again an ENL certified teacher is assigned to all of our stand-alone courses. The English class meets the State requirements for seat time to earn a student a credit. These English classes focus on level appropriate curriculum and in addition to the required ENL seat time, all students receive additional daily exposure to literacy development through content class teachers and other support classes specific to language development. There are currently 8 certified full time ENL teachers on site (6 teach ENL, 2 2018-19 CEP 52  teach content). Lessons are aligned with common core and state standards and consist of activities that foster both social and academic growth. Language functions, structures, usage and vocabulary are part of each lesson. Currently the materials used within classes vary but include class sets of novels appropriate for each level, teacher adapted materials, technology software such as Achieve, Destination Math, Rosetta Stone, Oxford Picture dictionary, and other programs specific to ELL language development (for example, the Longman Keystone series and Edge series). Explicit ENL instruction is delivered in ENL and content area classes through scaffolding activities and materials that support students’ comprehension and development. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Language Allocation Policy is a comprehensive school-wide plan designed to address the needs of our students as they progress toward academic proficiency in English and graduation. All core content classes is delivered in English and students are encouraged to speak and write in English through a myriad of activities focused on encouraging these skills. Core content classes embed cooperative learning incorporated into lessons. Additionally, students are encouraged to bring their personal experiences in through individual and group projects. The core content is delivered with academic language scaffolding, visuals, ENL strategies and differentiated instruction are also incorporated into our content area classes to strengthen listening, verbal, reading and written skills. The ENL lead teachers and administration work with all teachers to ensure that ELHS carries out a balanced literacy program intended to support our ELL students in meeting Common Core and NYS Learning Standards along with the State assessments. Three of our content teachers are dually certified in ENL and the remaining staff has or is receiving professional development. We expect teachers to use effective ENL strategies, to scaffold learning, to use native language supports, differentiate instruction and to incorporate technology into lessons as additional supports and entry points in the core content. All core content uses materials and textbooks that are Common Core aligned and support the project based learning focus emphasized within the curricula. Core content teachers utilize the same Common Core standards reflected in the ENL and English classes specific to language and literacy development as well as the Common Core standards specific to their classes. Core content teachers utilize translated books that are language specific as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During the intake process each student is given an informal assessment in which they must write and speak in their native language. We use this information to determine their first language strength. In addition, we complete the SIFE oral interview and the SIFE Lens with each student to check for gaps in their education. However, because we provide instruction in English, we only assess students once for SIFE and use this information to determine if a student has had formal education prior including academic language development. We determine where strengths and weaknesses in the students' learning might exist in order to provide additional supports. We encourage students to keep their Native Language by having every available Native Language source and support; providing all Regents exams in native translations (when available), and we have students take the LOTE exam in their native language (when available). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students receive additional courses offered and designed for them in our after school program that runs from 3:30 – 5:00 p.m. every day except Wednesday. In addition, we use blended learning both during the day and in after school classes to support our SIFE. The SIFE component of the after school program is designed to supplement all areas of language development in traditional academic and alternative learning environments including the arts, history, science, reading, and technology. ENL and English teachers collaborate with the content area to support additional language acquisition and academic development. In addition, we provide tutoring and extra academic support during the school day as well as our advisory periods that are designed to ensure students have the emotional supports that they need. In the mandated ENL and content area classes, instruction is differentiated by staff by providing additional strategies and supports that are scaffold to meet individualized students' needs. Staff embed in the core content and ENL classes visuals, technology, native language 2018-19 CEP 53  supports, graphic organizers, and other entry points. b. Our entire school program is modeled for newcomers. We offer additional support classes in ENL and content for students who are new arrivals and test as Entering. Here teachers embed additional native language supports, such as software and native language materials. We also use our diverse bilingual staff members to support our classroom teachers. We begin with basic level English instruction and scaffold our instruction to support our students. Our newcomers also are strongly encouraged and often scheduled in our extensive after school program. We discuss the need to be a part of our extended day with families during our intake process to help encourage and ensure students take full advantage. c. For the developing students, we identify them and inform the staff. We place these students who may still be at a emerging or transitioning level of English in tutoring and mandate many of them to take additional after school ENL and math classes for additional support. Our staff constantly looks at the data and reviews the students who fall into this category to ensure that we look at ways to best move them. d. All of our long term ELLs are identified by our ENL coordinator and administration; a regular update of their progress is provided by our guidance counselor and they are carefully monitored. Through individual meetings we determine the best supports and discuss structures for each student. Appropriate tutoring and scheduling is implemented to ensure that they are placed in the classes and tutoring they need to graduate on time and pass the required Regents exams. At this level, instruction is differentiated in the mandated ENL and core content classes by beginning to remove the scaffolds that students receive in the beginning levels. We adhere to a gradual release of responsibility to ensure that students skills and cognitive abilities are fostered and bolster in order to prepare them for college and career. e. Students who test out on the NYSESLAT continue to receive services consistent with their speaking, reading, writing and listening skills and graduation needs. Our transitional ELL students have access to a range of advance courses and stand alone English classes consistent with their grade and proficiency level. Every student at ELHS has the opportunity to graduate with an advance Regents diploma. We offer SAT prep courses, trigonometry and advanced Algebra. Students also have elective courses such additional foreign language and technology. Each year we also include blended learning courses that allow students to take AP courses and electives such as psychology. Commanding students still are required to take ENL classes and advanced English. We offer supports through our college readiness program and advisory programs to prepare students for transitioning after high school. Our college adviser provides students with information and tools for understanding regarding the college entrance process. Additionally, we are partnering with Pace High School to offer advance classes such as chemistry. Finally, we partner with Hunter College (College Now) in NYC and provide college credited courses to our most advance students. All students who are former Ells still receive testing accommodations for two years. (extended time, the use of glossaries, and translated test versions). We have been working with our co-located high school to offer students advanced courses as well. Finally, at this top level of instruction, teachers are creating lessons that mirror college rigor to ensure that students have smooth transition from high school to post-secondary settings.All instruction is scaffolded within the ENL leveled courses. Scaffolding is gradually removed as students move through levels and tasks are sequenced to provide additional challenges on each level. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At Emma Lazarus High School, we provide all staff with a plethora of resources. We have purchased textbooks, leveled reading both non-fiction and fiction and native language books for all ENL levels. We also embed in our instruction many forms of technology. Each student has a netbook that they are provided access to each day to carry with them from class to class. In addition, we have digital cameras, iPads, iPods, books on tape, books on line, and SmartEquipment. We use SIOP, TESOL and QTEL instructional strategies in all of our classes. Each lesson has content, language and Bloom's skills embedded. We use backward planning with our curriculum maps to ensure that students are on track to progress towards graduation and the passage of required state Regents. We accelerate English language development by requiring all students to double up on ENL with English and we strongly encourage after school for our newcomers, entering and emerging level students. With this additional time we target individual students’ needs and place them in small group instruction which is in addition to already scheduled tutoring time. All ENL- SWD's have full access to a computer daily and students needs are identified and matched with specific action plans. Compliance for mandated services will be monitored by an Assistant Principal. Teachers use instructional strategies such as visuals, word walls, vocabulary supports, native language supports, graphic organizers, and innovative strategies to support language acquisition. We do incorporate, Oxford Picture Dictionary, Rosetta Stone, Achieve 3000, Keystone, Edge, native language reading materials and traditional core content textbooks. For math we use Khan 2018-19 CEP 54  Academy, Delta Math, Geometer Sketch Pad and other technology as well as the newest Common Core aligned texts. In science and social studies, teachers do have access to translated text books and materials to support students as well Brainpop, Quizlet, Newsela and other software. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At Emma Lazarus High School we use our curriculum, instruction and schedule to individualize the needs of each student. We have small classroom numbers in ENL and we keep all newcomers in content classes that support their lower level academic language. We have a modified block schedule that allows for deep, meaningful project based instruction that engages students in the process of learning content while at the same time provides them plenty of opportunity to practice their new language. Students are provided instruction that is scaffolded, differentiated and level appropriate. We utilize all of our resources to ensure that instruction is rigorous and we pay special attention to students who are struggling while still offering a rigorous program to our accelerated students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our content area instruction is targeted to support the needs of second language students and infused with ENL supports and strategies. We have a targeted range of interventions that include tutoring during the day and after school courses. The targeted range places students in supports based on beginning, emerging through advance and modality, reading, listening, speaking and writing depending on their area of need. Again, here we use the NYSESLAT and NYSISTEL results to place students. Each staff has a group of students that they meet with twice a week for forty minutes to target specific skills for students who need the additional support. Additional targeted instruction occurs in student advisories where students receive support with social-emotional issues as well as instruction specific to the needs of ENL and immigrant students. The targeted interventions range from organization skills, to writing, reading, oral skills, job readiness skills, orientation skills and content specific skills. After school we offer homework assistance and targeted courses in ENL and math. In science and social studies we offer additional supports with native language materials and staff that push-in to provide native language support. In the culminating Regents courses we offer additional evening and weekend study and testing supports. All intervention services are offered in English with native language materials and supports available when applicable. We are an English immersion program and understand the additional supports and structures needed to prepare students to be college and career ready in a 2.5 to three years. Finally, on Wednesdays we offer targeted college and career readiness courses in technology, career exploration and college preparedness. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? With our rolling open admissions, we expect to take-in between 75-100 new students by years end 2016. This is indicative of the success we have had in graduating so many students over the past few years. We are working hard at norming our new students at both transitioning to New York City and ELHS. This school year, we are embedding more time in professional development and collaborative periods to look at student work, to focus on ENL strategies, and build our existing curriculum to best support ELL’s for the new common core Regents. We will be targeting our literacy across the curriculum and looking at how ENL objectives are met in each lesson in each of the content and ENL classes. Furthermore, we are going to continue to work on differentiation for both our lowest 1/3 and highest achieving students. Additionally, we will continue to do targeted work with our teachers around group instruction. We have determined that students learn best when they are given a task and need to find a solution in a group setting. Our students use their English to answer the problems in mixed language groupings. Finally, we will expand upon many of the successful programs from the last years. We have received an additional grant from the office of ELLs to support credit accumulation. We will use some of that grant to expand our program and embed additional PM classes in our curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A, we are English immersion. 2018-19 CEP 55  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELHS is comprised solely of second language students so all programming is open and specific to all ELL students. All programs, both during the day and after school offer either direct instruction for ELLs or serve as supplemental activities or instruction. We continue to explore avenues to provide more variety in activities for students such as additional arts programs and are working with other schools to expand/combine activities such as sports and other extracurricular events. We collaborate with the other high school in the building to offer soccer and have had our own basketball team. Students at ELHS also engage in community service projects and internships. These supplemental programs are integral to the development of our students and provide them opportunities for job exploration, targeted application of their English language skills and exposure to real work environments. Our Learning to Work (LTW, New York City Mission Society CBO) staff finds and develops these sites for our students. The internship sponsors are screened specifically for compatibility for our students as ELLs. Additionally, our LTW staff provides workshops and special engagements for our students around career and college and works with students as part of the acculturation process. Through our partnership with The New York City Mission Society, our students engage in community activities specific to their cultures. Some examples include participation in Latino and Chinese Heritage activities, special trips to museums and other culturally relevant venues and activities around the city of New York. Finally, we also facilitate trips to college campuses for our students. Our college adviser plans these activities to encourage our students to be active in choosing a school that our ELL students will be successful attending. All students have access to ESL classes after school and both tutoring and homework help. Saturday classes are offered for content classes for Regents preparation. Students also have access to cultural and experiential learning opportunities through out the year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ENL and content area teachers utilize materials designed to develop language skills along with content. The lead teachers and administration work directly with teachers in the selection of appropriate texts, reading materials, and listening activities. Materials are selected to allow for scaffolding to support students’ progress in the content areas as they acquire English. Such materials include Keystone and Edge as well as other ENL books and resources. Further, teachers use mobile laptops, listening labs, Smartboards and a variety of technological learning tools during their regular and after school classes. Our ELL students engage in extensive group work, completing many individual and group projects in both ENL and content-area classes. This allows them to collaborate, using English as a common language and produce presentations that reflect the material being learned in each academic class. Student netbooks, specific software such as GoogleDocs, Quizlet, Brainpop, Achieve 3000, Destination Math, Rosetta Stone, Oxford Picture Dictionary and other technology supports allow our students to access the internet and produce work that is professional and research-based. In each content classroom, as well as in the ENL classroom, students incorporate the fundamentals of ELA balanced literacy. To do so, students are taught in a print rich environment and are given access to the school library, our own developed reading room, as well as expansive classroom libraries. Furthermore, we label theses books with Lexile levels and use resources that are predetermined and written specifically to meet the benchmarks for the appropriate ENL levels and content courses. Additionally, each teacher is provided a budget to support his/her classroom through classroom libraries and other materials specific to the needs of the students in addition to the above identified materials, student are supported through technology. All students have their own individual lap tops which include access to all web based resources, teacher resource pages, Rosetta Stone, Achieve 3000, Brain pop, and Delta Math. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our content area courses we provide teachers and students with native language materials such as dictionaries and reading materials that are printed in multiple languages. We also have a diversified staff that speaks many of the languages of our ELLs and we program staff such that we are able to best utilize these additional language skills. We have support staff on site including our Learning to Work (LTW) staff that push-in to classrooms to provide additional translation support. Teachers provide instruction in English and we have native language supports and texts when students request or are the beginning level. We scaffold so that the language is broken down in level appropriate lessons to support student learning and success. We continue to hold each student to high expectations and push English vocabulary daily to increase student 2018-19 CEP 56  achievement. We initially assess students in Spanish based on the Spanish lab. We don't assess any native language during the year, we focus on how we can support students in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, all of the required services/resources, supports and materials we have obtained and continue to purchase correspond to the appropriate ELL level and are targeted to our over aged student population. We continue to grow and add to our native language materials, our ENL books, libraries and our software. Curriculum materials are assigned based on student ENL levels and Lexile levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share courses with PACE high school. They provide classes such as Chemistry and the arts to support our scheduling. They use our ENL expertise. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Since ELHS is comprised of second language students, a significant number of which are newly immigrated, all of our initial activities focus on creating an environment that is safe and secure for all entering students. During the first week of each school year teachers engage in a set of lessons focused on assisting newly enrolled students. In addition, each year, because of the receipt of the Title III summer grant, we also offer newly enrolled students the opportunity to attend our summer school prior to their entrance in September. We invite all of our newly enrolled students to partake in our four week intensive summer school. Our summer school is composed of instruction from 8:30 to 2:30 Monday thru Thursday and is an ENL intensive with an emphasis on speaking, reading, listening and English grammar. New students are welcomed to participate and therefore are immediately enveloped in the school’s culture. New students arriving after summer school are given a full introduction and orientation before starting. The guidance counselor and parent coordinator along with our advisers work closely with the student and family to ensure that they are aware of the school’s expectations and rules and there are many built in supports focused on continually "checking in" on the new students. We continue to seek and inform staff of new arrivals and the supports that they need. We have weekly meetings around students in which we often discuss academic progress and the work of these students as well as any special needs they may have, (i.e., - health, family, immigration, jobs or housing) We also provide staff with as much information as possible to support both the instruction of the new ELLs, and any emotional needs that a student may have when matriculating here. Our advisory system is also set up so that new students are immediately connected with a staff member of the LTW or other school staff to ensure that they are being supported socially emotionally as well as academically. Finally, as part of our fall programming we take our students on a leadership retreat to build community. This trip usually takes place in early September and is held at a nearby camp. We build leadership through traditional rope-courses, rock-climbing and other challenging physical activities that student’s must support and help each other. The feeling of accomplishment and achievement helps to build the safe and secure environment that is at the core of our school’s mission. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Through the use of FuelEd (online course provider) and Rosetta Stone we offer all of our students the option of learning additional languages. In addition, our diversified, bilingual staff offers students tutoring in foreign languages. Given our time and resource restraints at this time we do not offer stand alone foreign language courses. However, no stand-alone teacher instructed language electives are offered. Again, we are an all ENL transfer high school and students do not have the time to take electives outside of the mandates to graduate. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 57  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan provides our teachers and staff with several supports. We meet weekly as a staff around ENL teaching strategies and topics. On Tuesday we have our collaborative period; during this time we discuss student work, we provide structured time for teachers to co-plan between ENL and content classes, and we provide time for teachers to debrief on their instructional rounds visitations that occur quarterly throughout the year. During this visitation staff observe a list of strategies we have deemed as necessary for working with ELL students. Teachers and staff provide feedback to each other regarding strengths and weaknesses observed during these exchanges. On Wednesdays of every week we have professional development that provides staff a myriad of topics around best practices for ELL students. Such topics include, but are not limited to, language usage, visuals, groupings, classroom management, assessments and native language supports. In these workshops we focus on strategies from the SIOP model, technology supports and ENL strategies from QTEL and TESOL. Our professional development team and administrators work hard to plan based on the needs of the staff and use observations to check for classroom implementation of information covered in these sessions. We also support our staff with per session time after school to do intensive co-planning and work together both in department and across content. ELHS continues to develop strong curriculum maps that are Common Core aligned and designed with the end in mind. We backwards plan and use the Common Core along with our benchmarks to guide both our planning and professional development. In addition, each and every staff member is encouraged and financially supported to attend additional professional development training outside of the school. In addition, we use arts organizations such as Young Audience and the Lincoln Center Lead program to provide teachers and instruction with TPR (Total Physical Response), and to develop classroom strategies that engage our students. Furthermore, we have an ENL lead teachers and three administrators who work with teachers one-on-one to provide individual support and professional development. Lead teachers and administration are consistently in classrooms during instructional time and provide staff with feedback and suggestions for improving instruction. The lead teachers and administrators meet regularly both during the day and after school with staff to plan, work on assessments and review data. Additionally, we have several inquiry/PLC teacher teams that focus on data around our ELL students. For instance, one group’s focus is on the lower 1/3 of our student body and their academic progress. Our CEP goals are all written around moving our ELL students, and our inquiry groups are continually reviewing data to evaluate success. Finally, our guidance counselor, parent coordinator, community associates, school aides and secretary regularly attend DOE workshops that provide them with valuable information when dealing with ELL parents, documentation and emotional supports. The calendar for PD dates includes a PD session every Wednesday through out the year. As part of our weekly professional development and curriculum design we have been embedding the Common Core and looking at the shifts for ELL’s over the past several years. We are continuing to examine our curriculum maps and embed the Common Core tasks. This year we are beginning to explore assessments that will align to the new examinations that will be Common Core. We have sent and will continue to take advantage of NYCDOE professional development offerings for our staff, teachers and administration around the Common Core. Teachers are working to embed strategies such as closed reading, gap analysis and running records to track Lexile levels for students. Common Core unpacking of tasks and strategies are evaluated and shared at these weekly professional development meetings. Our projected professional development cycle will include topics around best practices for ENL, specifically targeting interventions, differentiation, assessment, and project based learning. We use an ASCD consultant to support our learning. Every professional development is focused on ENL instruction because again we are an all ENL school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 58  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Because we are an ELL only school, we continually provide staff with ENL training that exceeds the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by holding professional development weekly each Wednesday. Teachers sign in for each PD and copies of attendance sheets are maintained in the main office (Rm 206) Each of our non-ENL certified teachers attends workshops both within and outside of the DOE, such as SIOP, QTEL, TESOL or ASCD offerings. We meet every Wednesday for 80 minutes and every professional development session focuses on ELL-specific strategies. By focusing every meeting, we are 100% of the professional development requirement for ELL - specific strategies for all teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During each September, we send home a letter to every ELL family that provides them with their students’ most recent NYSESLAT proficiency results and remind them of the choice to have their child enrolled in an ENL immersion program. This letter invites families to make an appointment to meet with the guidance counselor or other appropriate school staff to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency results, and language development needs in all content areas. We follow up with parents and set an appointment for the meetings. At this meeting, we provide staff to support with translation in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands when needed. We record attendance and keep notes of the meetings with the parents. The letter and all records are kept in the students files./ Question 2- for below- All records for parent meetings are kept in the main office (room 206). We use the NYDOE translation service over the phone when a staff member is not able to hold the meeting in the parents desired language. This is done during our parent outreach period and whenever else it is necessary. All teachers, guidance counselors and additional office staff support parent outreach. We specifically target staff through our hiring process that speak a language other than English when possible and they are the most qualified for the position. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in our school consists of regular monthly meetings, conferences, workshops and comprehensive outreach. We currently hold a meeting on every third Thursday of the month for all parents. Again, all of our students are ENL, so all of our parent engagement and involvement includes topics and content that target immigrant and non-English speaking family units. AT our PTA meetings we provide parents with a list of topics that are predetermined based on parent surveys sent home, completed through our automated telephone system or done informally with our parent coordinator, guidance counselor, and staff. Topics this year will range from immigration issues, and health issues, literacy and technology. In addition, we pair up with organizations to provide adult English classes, computer literacy classes, health classes that take place during the week and on weekends. Our staff reaches out to parents directly whenever there is an issue or positive matter to discuss regarding student progress during our designated family outreach period that occurs weekly. Our LTW staff work hard with parents and involves them with the school. They often invite parents on school trips and get them interested in the college process and other services provided through the New York City Mission Society. Finally, we have a monthly newsletter and use our automated phone messaging system, engradepro.com (our online grade book) or the NYC DOE FAMIS system to communicate with parents on an ongoing basis. All communication is translated in the parents preferred language when requested. All of our parents are Title III. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Of the students that are not designated ELL’s in our data set, 100 % of them are prior ELL’s that have passed out of the NYSESLAT. We strive to get a 100% passage rate on the NYSESLAT for all graduating seniors. The other students passed the 2018-19 CEP 59  NYSISTELL upon entering our school but come from a home in which English is the second language. Students in this group traditionally are still new immigrants to the US but had sufficient English in their native country to pass the NYSESELAT and/or NYSISTELL. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melody Kellogg, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Emma Lazarus High School for E School DBN: 02m394 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melody Kellogg Title Principal Joel E. Heckethorn Assistant Principal TBD Parent Coordinator Dustin Brumit ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Ordonez Parent Bryan McGuinness Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Yee Shau School Counselor Paul Rotondo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/15/17 6/18/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M394 School Name: Emma Lazarus HS for ELL Schoolars Superintendent: LaShawn Robinso The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At Emma Lazarus High School, English Language Learners speak over 13 different native languages not including various dialects. Upon registration, the admission team determines the language needs of the parents through a combination of methods that include an individual interview and a parent’s completion of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Based on identification of the parent’s language needs, the interview is conducted in the language of choice with the family. Language needs are entered into ATS and recorded on the emergency contact cards. Upon identification of the language, all further services and forms are provided in the language of choice to the family. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 63 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language ELHS translation needs are determined based on the information we receive from families during intake, and from classroom observations of student needs. The summary of our school's findings indicate that we currently have the following home languages identified by parents: Arabic 3; Bengali 1; Cantonese 59; Chinese other 2; French 23; Haitian Creole 6; Mandarin 68; Polish 2; Russian 18; Spanish 39; Thai 2; Urdu 1, and Uzbek 1. Since all students attending ELHS are second language students, unsurprisingly, the findings indicate the need for support for both parents in multiple languages. Since we have a staff that is reflective of our student body, we are able to support our parents internally with translation and interpretation. A specific staff member has been identified to serve as the translator for written documents for each language. This individual translates all documents and letters sent to parents and students. Information is shared with the school community in a variety of methods including: ATS reports; emergency card information; and professional development that is focused on student and parent outreach. 2018-19 CEP 64  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The documents that we typically disseminate each year are: entitlement letters; NYSISTELL and NYSESLAT results letter; Parent Bill of Rights; Monthly Parent Newsletter that also includes PTA information; Report Cards; Open School Night letters (September, October, March and May); Opt out letters for condoms, Military, surveys; permission slips for trips; (NEEDS TO HAVE ADDITIONAL LETTERS and COMMUNICATIONS THAT I’M UNAWARE OF ADDED!!!) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We adhere to the 4 parent-teacher conference as per the DOE calendar (September, October, March and May); our staff call and email parents every Friday and we request parent meetings on as needed basis. Our Learning to Work (LTW) NYC Mission Society team also makes regular phone calls regarding attendance and special events. The LTW and advisors call parents before all special events 2018-19 CEP 65  to remind them, such as the parent conferences.. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) ELHS has internal oral and written translation in place to support the school and DOE initiative and a diverse population of staff with the necessary language skills for translation. Language needs are identified during admission. At this time all parents and students are provided information regarding translation, including the Parents’ Bill of Rights. We are in compliance with all requirements in the Chancellor’s Regulation A-633. In cases where additional assistance is needed we utilize the DOE translation unit for written and oral services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school’s guidance counselor, parent coordinator and LTW staff formally and informally survey families to gather information. During this process, we gather feedback from parents regarding the quality and availability of our translation services, and the timeliness and means of dissemination of information. Parents regularly provide us with ways to better improve our communication. 2018-19 CEP 66 
