2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M399 School Name: THE HIGH SCHOOL FOR LANGUAGE AND DIPLOMACY Principal: SARAH HERNANDEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: HS for Language and Diplomacy 31020011399 9-12 40 Irving Place 212-253-2480 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M399 212-253-2539 Fax: Joseph Anderson Janders12@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Sarah Hernandez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Joel Roberts-Robles Stevlana Durand Joseph Anderson SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Stevlana Durand TamaraAviles TavonCoates Tatiana Rodriguez Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY VOrlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: YuetChu Executive Director: 333 7th Ave New York NY Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sarah Hernandez Joel Roberts-Robles TBD Robert Sutton TBD TavonCoates Tamara Aviles *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Tatiana Rodriguez CBO Representative, if applicable TBD TBD TBD Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Pearl Dixon Joseph Anderson NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Teacher CSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the High School for Language and Diplomacy is to support the development of decent, respectful and caring citizens of the world who explore beliefs and values and how they influence actions, policies, and practices around the world. The dimensions of our program are articulated as follows: ● Encouraging important international values: conflict resolution, human rights, sustainability, global education, and religious and cultural understanding; 2018-19 CEP 9  ● Recognizing the importance of global issues; ● Showing respect for, and integration with, all cultures. ● Serving the international community and those committed to the concept of international education. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Established in 2009, The High School for Language and Diplomacy (LAD) is a progressive, research-based institution with a particular focus on international studies, service learning, global citizen and bi-literacy. This school exists for the sake of its students and is committed to a continual re-evaluation of their needs in light of the rapid pace of social, economic and cultural change. In all aspects of its provision our school will strive continually to do better than its previous best. Now, more than ever, it is important to understand the world in which we live: one's position in the world, and how different cultural, economic, political and social systems operate and interrelate. LAD aims to support this understanding in order to prepare students for membership in the world community. This is a vision attained through mutual understanding, open-mindedness, and shared humanitarian values. It respects individual and cultural identity and stresses the importance of exploring and developing one’s own interests, views and values while also exploring and appreciating the view sets of others. This vision has shaped the education provided by the school throughout the years since it was founded. It is a vision that continues to inform every aspect of the school’s life today. Our school is ideal for students interested in learning about world affairs and world cultures, studying world languages, wanting to connect global and local issues, and desiring to be engaged in civic responsibility and/ or global citizenship. The High School for Language and Diplomacy equips students to navigate the international environment in which they will increasingly find themselves living. Our interdisciplinary program exists to guide students to be globally aware, to think critically, to become conversant in global affairs, to be sensitive to the needs and desires of diverse systems and cultures, to become literate in one or more world languages, and to analyze enduring global concerns in a comprehensive manner. The High School for Language and Diplomacy is located in Manhattan, minutes from Union Square. We strive to serve this uniquely international metropolitan area. New York City also has its own deep-rooted intellectual, cultural and political traditions. It is this richness and this mingling of global influences that provides the background to the vision of the High School for Language and Diplomacy. While the language of instruction is English, every effort is made to develop students’ fluency in Spanish, French language or the Mandarin Dialect and to ensure that they graduate bi-literate. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Students with disabilities account for approximately 18% of our student population. Of this population, 4 students have 1:1 paras (crisis, health, mobility), 6 receive pull out SETTS services, 16 receive speech services, and all receive ICT services in core content class (math, ELA, social studies, science) according to IEP mandates. ENL students comprise 11% of our overall student population. 35% of the ENL population is Spanish and 32% Chinese. Students are programmed according to proficiency level with 11 students receiving stand alone ENL instruction. The remainder receiving push in ENL instruction and exclusively push in services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year was Rigorous Instruction Key areas of focus for this school year: Culturally Relevant Teaching and QR 1.2 Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M399 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 327 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 2 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 12 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 76.1% % Reduced Lunch 14.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 41.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.69 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 84% 80% 80.0% 18.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 46 53 81.2% 1.5% 16.5% 19.9% 31.2% 2.4% 4 17% 4 N/A N/A 86% 78% 78.6% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strengths relative to this Framework element: QR 4.1 School leaders support the development of teachers with frequent observations and provide effective feedback. Feedback accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps using the Danielson Framework for Teaching and student work analysis. QR 1.1 School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the instructional shifts such as academic vocabulary. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. Priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element: In 2017 (Cohort S), the overall graduation rate was 81% while the graduation rate of Black and Hispanic Males in the Citywide Lowest Third improved to 61.5%, producing an achievement gap of 19.5%. Our most recent cohort (T – June 2018) had an overall graduation rate of 83%, with Black and Hispanic Males in the Lowest Third graduating at 69%, resulting in an achievement gap of 14% - the first time in school history this gap was below 15%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the second cycle of observations, at least 50% of the teachers will demonstrate a clear understanding of what culturally responsive teaching means by improving in components 1e and 3b of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development - Teachers will examine research such as Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain by Zaretta Hammond that supports rigorous instruction through culturally relevant pedagogy. Teachers Department Teams - will meet regularly to support each other in providing feedback to one another on tasks designed to address skills gaps. Core department teachers Teachers will do inter-visitations and give feedback to each other every other Wednesday. Grade Cohort inquiry team - will meet on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday to identify skill gaps, and teaching strategies that address achievement gaps. Team members will conduct inter-visitations to look for evidence of content and culturally responsive teaching and student engagement. Black and Hispanic Males in the Citywide Lowest Third. Principal, Assistant Principals, and Instructional Team Leaders. Instructional Team Leaders September, 2018 through May, 2019 September, 2018 through June, 2019 September, 2018 - May, 2019. Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers Teachers will support each other in developing lessons, and tasks that demonstrate clear goals and desired learner outcomes. This development process will be grounded in a focus on formulating pre-determined questions that are designed to intellectually challenge and engage all students so that they will make their thinking visible. Grade teams will meet as follows: U cohort - Monday, period 4 V cohort – Tuesday, period 4 W cohort – Thursday, period 4 X cohort – Friday, period 4 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning November 2018 and on a monthly basis, we will conduct workshops for families to guide them on ways to actively engage and support students in developing their critical thinking skills. Workshops will also include training in transcript evaluation and common core instructional shifts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. After-school support is provided for students to work in small groups with teachers for make-up assignments, and tutoring. Starting November 2018, teachers will receive additional support from administrators and teacher leaders through weekly, bi-weekly and monthly coaching sessions to develop their pedagogical teaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the first and second marking period, our pass rate for the target subgroups: X cohort - Black and Hispanic Males in the School-wide Lowest 1/3, W cohort- Black and Hispanic Males in the School-wide Lowest 1/3, V cohort - Black and Hispanic Males in the School-wide Lowest 1/3, and U cohort - Black and Hispanic Males in the School-wide Lowest 1/3 will increase by at least 2% from the 2017-2018 SY marking periods 1 & 2. By June 2019 the 10+ credit accumulation for the targeted subgroups will increase by at least 2% from 2017 – 2018 SY. Mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal:  Principal will provide weekly coaching sessions for assistant principals coaching session  Principal will provide bi-weekly coaching sessions for teacher leaders  Administrators and teacher leaders will provide weekly teacher coaching sessions  Daily classroom walkthroughs with a focus on the P.O.P.  Advance observation reports  Cohort teams will review and analyze scholarship reports and monitor progress toward credit accumulation at the end of each marking period.  Classroom walkthroughs show evidence of student goal-setting and self-monitoring  Classroom walkthroughs evidence show evidence of student to student  The school community will use a consultancy protocol to reflect on the P.O.P.  The school community will use the ORID protocol to review the credit accumulation reports  Teachers will use LASW protocol to identify gaps in student learning.   Team Agendas, minutes, and work products  Mid- Year Conferences Initial Conferences 2018-19 CEP 15   Inter-visitations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  By September 28, 2018 all teachers would have received specific feedback on initial walkthroughs with next steps for addressing our P.O.P... By October, 2018 we will complete the first cycle of observations and teachers will receive specific feedback aligned to our instructional focus. By November, 2018 we will begin our second cycle of observations and assess our progress in developing teacher practices for 1e and 3b.  By February, 2019 70% of the students in the highlighted subgroup will be on track to meet the credit-accumulation benchmark for June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. The school’s strength relative to this Framework element according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide data shows that 85% of students say that their teachers treat them with respect, and 77% of students say that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element is the following: 45% of students say that this school offers a wide enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school. 41% of students say that the programs, classes, and activities at their school encourage them to develop talent outside academics. 3. Structures that are in place to ensure we are supporting the whole child: Student Support Coordinators  Assist BRT liaison in training teachers on appropriate safety procedures.  To work collaboratively with guidance department to provide mediation, conflict resolution, restorative practices. Director of Student Life  Coordinate various student activities and services (in consultation with the principal) including developing, organizing, and advising various clubs, cultural, educational and social programs for student population, staff and community members.  Assist student government programs and boards with developing and organizing activities, services and promotion of the student government; attend meetings as needed  Coordinate a variety of student services programs and activities including new student recruitment, orientation, community service and other activities; collaborate with other school personnel regarding special activities and services. Clubs/Activities: Step Club Service Club   Culture Club   Dance Club  Book Club Fitness Club   Gaming Club  Anime Club 2018-19 CEP 17   Theater Arts Club  Comic Book Club  Homework Help  Annual Potluck Celebrating Diversity  Talent Show  College Trips  PSAL Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-2019 NYC School Quality Guide for improving student outcomes and school performance that address this element will improve as follows:   From 2017-2018 where 45% of students stated that that this school offers a wide enough variety of programs to at least 55%. From 2017-2018 where 41% of students stated that the programs, classes, and activities at their school encourage them to develop talent outside academics to at least 60%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continued implementation of PGC program to train 12th grade students to serve as mentors to 9th grade students 9th - 12th grades Student Support Team members will meet weekly to monitor structures designed to support achievement in communicating high expectations, to staff, students, and families. Teams members will meet every Wednesday to monitor student behavior and ways to communicate high academic and behavior expectations. All grades PGC teacher and student leaders. Principal and Assistant Principal September, 2018 through June 2019 September, 2018 through June, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During monthly PA and SLT meetings, via parent workshops, daily phone messenger, and the school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  For a fifth year, we have partnered with the PGC program which provided intensive training for two lead PGC instructors and materials for use with PGC student leaders. We have funded the planning retreats for our PGC student leaders and adjusted schedules to ensure they can run weekly freshmen outreach activities (every Friday period 5). Common planning time has been established for the PGC teachers.  We will allocate funds in Galaxy for food incentives, awards, trips and other incentives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student Support Team members will meet every Wednesday, and at the end of each marking period (October, December, February, March, May, and June) to analyze the progress of student behavioral patterns, identify intervention strategies for celebrating positive academic, attendance and behavior. By December, 2018 attendance, academic, and discipline data will improve for at-risk students from December 2017. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports, CASS reports, OORS data, scholarship reports, SKEDULA reports, and feedback for PGC student and teacher leaders. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s strengths relative to this Framework element QR 4.2 Findings: The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations. Distributed leadership structures are consistently implemented in the school community. The following priority need(s) will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element: Grade Cohort Inquiry Teams will conduct inter-visitations and give each other feedback on the evidence collected for culturally responsive teaching and student engagement. Teacher leaders will collaborate with their colleagues to create and model culturally relevant pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element: Administrators and teacher leaders will support our male black and Latino task force by keeping our staff grounded through courageous conversations about race and equity. By February, 2019, 50% of the students in the highlighted subgroup will be on track for Regents graduation requirements. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development Meetings will help teachers develop a clear understanding culturally responsive teaching All teachers September, 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Instructional Team Leaders Instructional Team Leaders will meet every other Thursday, period 4 (and other times), with the principal, to discuss action plans for department meetings, monitor content area progress for improving teaching and learning. Instructional Team Leaders August 2018 through June 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Teams will meet every other Wednesday to support each other in providing feedback to one another on tasks designed to address skills gaps. Core department teachers Instructional Team Leaders September 2018 through June 2019 All teachers September, 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Instructional Team Leaders Teachers will do inter-visitations and give feedback to each other every other Wednesday. Grade Cohort inquiry team - will meet on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday to identify skill gaps, and teaching strategies that address achievement gaps. Team members will conduct inter-visitations to look for evidence of content and culturally responsive teaching and student engagement. Teachers will support each other in developing lessons, and tasks that demonstrate clear goals and desired learner outcomes. This development process will be grounded in a focus on formulating pre-determined questions that are designed to intellectually challenge and engage all students so that they will make their thinking visible. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Mr. Anderson and Mr. Robles will support families in their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home. This support will take place during our monthly SLT and PA meetings. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have created a teacher support team and scheduled time for planning, weekly meetings, inter-visitations, to support and develop teacher practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Initial Conferences   Team Agendas, minutes, and work products  Mid- Year Conferences   Coaching sessions Inter-visitations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Walkthroughs  Advance observation Reports  Teacher Improvement Plan meetings Inter-visitations  Scholarship reports   Attendance reports   Student Surveys Student Feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strengths relative to this Framework element: Evidence has shown that all areas of student data have improved over the past two years but there is still a need to focus on skill development in the classroom. With a focus on teacher performance and classroom instruction, we can further close the gaps on student achievement and prepare students for the rigor of the common core and the challenges of post-secondary education. The priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element Reviewing the ADVANCE data from the 2017-2018 school year, we continue to have deficits in the areas 1e Designing Coherent Instruction, 3B Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and 3C Engaging Students in Learning. The use of common assessments is being developed, but the daily formative assessment use is not at the level that it should be. The weaknesses discovered in 1e have a strong effect on the other three competencies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Administrators and teachers will participate in professional development, receive lesson plan feedback, and coaching sessions around: culturally responsive teaching, designing coherent instruction and student high level intellectual engagement that will result the highlighted subgroup graduating at a higher rate than in previous years.  By September 28, 2018 all teachers would have received specific feedback on initial walkthroughs with next steps for addressing our P.O.P... By October, 2018 we will complete the first cycle of observations and teachers will receive specific feedback aligned to our instructional focus. By November, 2018 we will begin our second cycle of observations and assess our progress in developing teacher practices for 1e and 3b.  By February, 2019 70% of the students in the highlighted subgroup will be on track to meet the credit-accumulation benchmark for June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development meetings will help teachers develop a clear understanding culturally responsive teaching. All teachers Guidance/Attendance Team members will review attendance reports, and transcripts to monitor student progress towards graduation. 9th - 12th grades Department Teams will meet every other Wednesday to support each other in providing feedback to one another on tasks designed to address skills gaps. Core content teachers Teachers will do inter-visitations and give feedback to each other every other Wednesday. Cabinet & Instructional Team Leaders Meetings will meet weekly, bi-weekly and monthly to review the Strategic Instructional Plan, monitor progress of the Instructional Team Leaders, and to review observation data to target coaching and professional development. Assistant Principals, Instructional Team Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Instructional Team Leaders Principal and Assistant Principal Assistant Principal, Instructional Team Leaders August 2018 - June 2018 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Mr. Anderson and Mr. Robles will support families in their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home. This support will take place during our monthly SLT and PA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Starting November 2018, teachers will receive additional support from administrators and teacher leaders through weekly, bi-weekly and monthly coaching sessions to develop their pedagogical teaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of Highlighted Group Students will be on track for Regents requirement (January Regents) By February 2019, Black and Hispanic males will account for under 40% of suspensions issued (OORS report) By February 2019, the percentage of students who reply they feel challenged on an internal survey will be above 50% (in-house survey) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly coaching sessions with teachers and administrators, and weekly meetings with teacher leaders. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s strengths relative to this Framework element: QR 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element: Analysis of PTA meeting attendance and parent turn out rate for Parent Conference Afternoons/Evenings indicates that we are in need of generating a greater level of parental involvement. As we serve children of all boroughs of the city, attendance at school-based meetings and events may be difficult for many parents. To improve the home to school connection, we have adopted the phone messenger system and Skedula/Pupil Path to allow for greater levels of parental involvement in their child’s academic life. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see in increase in both the participation rate of parents on the School Learning Environment Survey and on questions specific to communication between home and school. 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Administrators August, 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Strong Family and Community Ties •Provide time for staff member to update the on-line grade book for each student in terms of attendance, test grades, class work and anecdotal and responses to parent emails Provide translated copies of all notices and communication for those families that speak a language other than English • Schedule IEP Annual Review and Triennial conferences at a time that is convenient for parents, so that they can play a larger role in the planning of the appropriate supports for improved student outcomes. • Provide incentives for parents of at-risk/high needs students to get involved in their child’s educational program. • Provide parents with academic progress information on a regular basis • Schedule guidance conferences with students and parents who are not meeting promotional requirements. • Provide teaching staff with professional development and time for collaboration during weekly content area common planning time and Monday and Tuesday extended days.  Utilize teacher feedback sessions to provide actionable feedback, allow teachers to reflect on and shift daily practice, as well as to discuss the planning and implementation of Common Core-aligned units.  Provide time for teachers to participate in teacher teams, engaging in inquiry to analyze student work to adjust teaching practice and instructional planning; • Provide time or funding for staff to plan Common Core-aligned units to gain familiarity with key instructional practices; 2018-19 CEP 28 • Review the scope and sequence of each content area as listed on the NY Engage website and plan for the anticipated implementation of the Common Core Standards and the elimination of the Regents Exams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. School -Based Health Center   Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP  YMCA  Campus School Psychologist Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed are as follows: Hiring a new parent coordinator, allowing for a common planning time for teachers to update their on-line grade book, answer parent emails and respond to parent calls. Budget for, translation services, postage, per session for evening event presentations, food and other incentives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data will be collected throughout the year in terms of the number of parents attending school events and conferences. An excel spreadsheet will be created to monitor the numbers and the progress in achieving this goal. A mid-year check will take place during the last week of January with the appropriate staff members and parent leaders. Adjustments to this goal will be made at that time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SKEDULA, PUPIL PATH, phone messenger reports, parent-teacher conference attendance sheets, and parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who did not pass the ELA Regents or who need to re-take the ELARegents to meet the College-Readiness. Students in the lowest third as well as and by teacher recommendation who need extra support prior to taking the ELA Regents in January 2019or June 2019 or June 2020. Students who did not pass the Algebra CC and need to retake the exam. In addition, we will focus on a proactive approach, identifying students of the lowest third as well as those recommended by teachers, who need extra support prior to taking the Algebra CC in January 2019 or June 2019. Students who did not pass the Living Environment and/or Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one on one tutoring After-School, and during theirlunch periods. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students will receive support in to : Develop their vocabulary andwriting skills Small group and one on one tutoring. Programming schedule. After-School, Saturdays, and during theirlunch periods. Students will receive tutoring support.Students who have shown deficiencies in math have been programmed for a 4 semester sequence in Algebra to allows for more time to develop an understanding and master the skills necessary for success on the Common Core Algebra exam. Tutoring sessions in Living Environment Small group and one on one tutoring. After-School, during lunch periods 2018-19 CEP 30  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Earth Science Regents and who need to repeat the Regents. In addition, we will focus on a proactive approach, identifying students of the lowest third as well as those recommended by teachers, who need extra support prior to taking the a Science Regents in January 2019 and June2019. Students who did not pass the Global and/or American History Regents and who need to repeat the Regents. In addition, we will focus on a proactive approach, identifying students of the lowest third as well as those recommended by teachers, who need extra support prior to taking the Global History or American History Regents in January 2019 June 2019. Referrals are made by staff, parent request or by student self-referral. and Earthscience Regents exams. Opportunity for Lab make-up. Small group and one on one tutoring. After-School, during lunch periods Tutoring to develop content knowledge, literacy and writing skills necessary for success on the Global and US History Regents exams. Students are provided individual counseling on a need basis. 5:1 Group services or individual 1:1 counseling During lunch periods and as needed during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 46 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Enhance partnerships that provide additional services and resources to students and families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32 Supports families/students in temporary housing by offering solutions and providing notebooks, pens, and book bags as needed. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The hiring committee selects the most suitable highly-qualified candidates from the pool. Teachers receive high quality weekly professional development and attend outside professional development to ensure that we recruit, and retain highly qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). On-going school-based professional development, weekly on-site staff development, daily common planning/collaboration, as well as weekly content area collaboration are in place. There is on-going curriculum development and the re-alignment of the pacing calendars and curriculum which is led collaboratively by the assistant principals and the lead teachers. Ongoing professional development targeted to individual staff needs, based on student deficits is a regular practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Utilizing a distributive teacher leadership model, our Rigorous Instruction Team and Instructional Leaders Team make decisions on the use of uniform assessments that are utilized across a grade level content area. These teams will also be responsible for monitoring and evaluating the work of the department, grade and Framework Teams for through line of the schoolwide action plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5B Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal 240,766 0 12, 366 x x Section 6 5B Section 6 2018-19 CEP 35  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 0 2,731,606 x All sections 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 36   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School for Language and Diplomacy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School for Language and Diplomacy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 39  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages those parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Language and Diplomacy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 41  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including Analyze and evaluate the effectiveness of the structure an author uses in his or her Begin description here: Our ELA Academic Writing Development and Enrichment After School Program will runELA Academic Writing Development and Enrichment After School Program will run for a total of 32 sessions for 16 weeks x 1.5 hour sessions beginning Thursday, October 4th, 2018 through Wednesday, June 12th, 2019 from 2:45PM-4:15 PM. Our rationale for this program is based upon the following data: Of the 24 students ENL students comprise approximately 11% of our student population, the majority of whom have a home language of Chinese. 11% of our total student body are ENL students. 35% of whom are Spanish speakers and 29% of whom speak a Chinese dialect. Our ENL population breaks down as follows: 2% Entering, 12% Emerging, 24% transitioning, and 50% expanding. Our program will focus heavily on emerging and transitioning ENLs in an effort to move them towards expanding. This program will serve mixed grades 9-12, grouped in no more than two contiguous grades with 1 certified ELA teacher and 1 ESL teacher, as a way to have students at different levels work collaboratively to strengthen writing skills. There will be no more than 30 students in the program. The majority of students participating in our ENL programs are at transitioning and expanding proficiency levels. Each session will focus on developing targeted skills for increased performance of the following writing skills for ELA: · figurative, connotative, and technical meanings; analyze how an author uses and refines the meaning of a key term or terms over the course of a text. · exposition or argument, including whether the structure makes points clear, convincing, and engaging. · particularly effective, analyzing how style and content contribute to the power, persuasiveness or beauty of the text.&nbsp; Writing and literacy skills will be developed and enhanced by reading, annotating, and discussing the following graphic novels: The Magic Life of Long Tak Sam and Yummy: The Last Days of a Southside Shorty. Along with the CCLS mentioned above, there will be heavy emphasis placed on the use of literary techniques such as metaphor, simile, perspective, symbolism, etc. Primary language of instruction will be English with co-teaching by a certified ESL teacher. Content area teacher of ELA will be paired with ESL teacher in a co-teaching environment. Exploring Language and Literature Enrichment Class Our ENL students will receive 50% of their instruction from one certified ESL/ELA licensed teacher. Exploring Language and Literature Enrichment Class October 5th, 2018 - June 14th, 2019 Fridays from 2:45 - 4:15 PM. One certified ESL/ELA teacher: $60.65 32 sessions for 16 weeks x 1.5 hour sessions = $2,911.20 for after school enrichment sessions - One ESL/ELA teacher will work closely with small groups of students to increase academic in ELA and social studies skills. The ESL teacher will support and work with students to help them gain knowledge, and awareness of different cultures through art, food and music in an inclusive supportive environment. This class will focus on the development of academic English &nbsp;Determine an author’s point of view or purpose in a text in which the rhetoric is 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information including use of the four language modalities with specific emphasis on oral academic language (oral presentations and debates) as well as development of literary analysis skills and writing in different academic genres. Saturday ESL/Math Enrichment Class Saturday ESL/Math Enrichment Class, will provide additional direct instructions (with a writing component to ELLs) who need additional support in developing writing and math skills as evidenced by NYSELAT and Algebra I regents and course scores. This class will team taught with by 1 math and 1 ENL teacher. Our ENL students will receive 50% of their instruction from a certified ESL licensed teacher. There will be 14 sessions, with two teachers. The sessions will run from 9am - 1pm. $60.65 X 10 sessions (2 teachers) =$4,852.00. Students will work on developing quantitative and qualitative analysis skills in mathematics via the use of teacher developed materials and online resources. ELA Academic Writing Development and Enrichment After School Program Our ELA Academic Writing Development and Enrichment After School Program will run for a total of 32 sessions for 16 weeks x 1.5 hour sessions totaling $2,911.20 beginning Thursday, October 4th, 2018 through Wednesday, June 12th, 2019 from 2:45PM-4:15 PM. The Title III instructional program will be supported through purchase of instructional materials described below for enhancement of ELLs academic and literacy skills. In addition two trips to cultural landmarks and museums will provide opportunities for students to connect curricular content in ELA and social studies explored in the Title III program with resources available in New York City. Students will develop essays and mini-research projects based on these trips and also the use of literature and multimedia resources. Museum fees for two trips $12.00 per student, for 24 students each trip. Writing and literacy skills will be developed and enhanced by reading, annotating, and discussing the following graphic novels: The Magic Life of Long Tak Sam, Yummy: The Last Days of a Southside Shorty, and other books including informational text and fiction totaling $1,153.60. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Two Title III teachers will participate in ELL focused professional development as follows at no cost to Title III. They will share information with the other Title III teachers as well as other teachers of ELL students. The ELL Leads Workshop series for HS (5 sessions) The series of workshops will facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators. Each session aims to deepen participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction. The instructional focus is on literacy across disciplines. This series will use the knowledge-building approach to developing language in unit design within an Advanced Literacy framework. Participants learn to design instructional units for knowledge building in content areas and reflect on their practices in the classrooms to affect students’ learning. Topics include: Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design Advanced Literacy 9/21/18 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development Design learning tasks in content area units Dates: 10/30/18 Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units Dates : 12/4/18 Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Classrooms 01/17/19 Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning? 02/04/19 rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: To foster greater levels of student and family engagement. We will host 3 academic and enrichment classes for parents on a monthly basis. Topics of workshops (translated) will include: 1 - February 13, 2019 5:30 - 7:00PM: Welcome to the Title III Program-This family engagement workshop will focus on sharing with families the importance of enrichment programs in supporting their ELL students. 2 - March 20, 2019 5:30 - 7:00PM: Testing, Testing, & More Testing Workshop - This workshop will serve to provide parents of ELL students the requirements necessary for graduation as well as information on extended time and use of support materials. 3 - April 17, 2019 5:30 - 7:00PM: Life Beyond College - This workshop will serve to provide parents and students alike with information provided by colleges to support their ELL needs after high school. All workshops will be presented by the assistant principal and ENL teacher with no cost to Title III. Parents of ELLs will be provided refreshments in each of these workshops at the cost of $250.00. Parents are notified of these events via traditional mail, email, phone messenger, and school website - all notices are translated to target languages. Interpretation services will be provided by school staff and the partner organization. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name High School for Language and Diplomacy Borough Manhattan School Number 399 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Hernandez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Josefina Pineyro Teacher/Subject Area Renequa Johnson/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider David Zfff Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Lawrence Orr Coach type here School Counselor Jennifer Cornell Parent Brad Southern Parent Coordinator Octavia Hallett Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 450 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 45 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school reviews our NYSESLAT results annually for emerging trends and to analyze the efficacy of our previous year's programing and curricular decisions. We also look at our Regents results as well as credit accumul;ation for our ELLs to better provide them the program needed to help them achieve a 4-year graduation. 2018-19 CEP 50  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our NYSESLAT data show that our students are progressing in their English language acquisition. Generally, our students have higher scores for Speaking than Listening, and Reading than Writing, indicating that our curriculum must stress these modalities to support our students' continued growth. We had no students requiring the administration of the NYSITELL. We are focusing our ENL support in our English Language Arts classes through push-in support and dually certified teachers, and our teachers focus their efforts in those classes as well as our freestanding ENL classes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are individually programmed based on their NYSESLAT results, with integrated ELA/ESL sections supported with free-standing ESL for students who are currently at the Entering or Emerging performance levels. Students are grouped based on their proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. Students in the integrated classes are grouped heterogeneously, while the free-standing classes offer extra support in homogeneous grouping. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs and former ELLs receive 225 of integrated ELA/ESL per week. Our Emerging students receive another 225 minutes per week of free-standing ESL, and our Entering students receive a further 450 minutes per week, surpassing the requirements of CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All integrated ESL and free-standing ESL instruction is delivered in English, with instructional groups within the classroom adjusted based on level, activity, and/or material. Our teachers in 9-11 utilize the Hochman writing method, which equips 2018-19 CEP 51  students with the foundational skills of reading and writing, allowing students to elaborate on their thinking to participate in class discussion. This writing program is aligned with the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the year, as new students come into the school, Ms. Pollio, our Guidance Counselor, ensures that students are evaluated in their home languages to determine ELL eligibility as mentioned above. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Most of our SIFE students are at or approaching grade-level performance in their core-content area classes and according to their assessment results and had been coded as Previous SIFE according to the RBPS. Students who still present with an achievement gap would be targeted for small group instruction as well as after-school programming. Instructional focus for these students would include decoding and encoding skills, reading and writing strategies such as scanning for information and outlining and word recognition and vocabulary skills. Students receiving services between four and six years will continue to benefit from strategies such as scaffolding, contextualization, modeling, demonstrations and comprehension checks and will participate in frequent shared, modeled, independent writing exercises, will be exposed to extensive teacher modeling, and the steps of the writing process will be reinforced. Of our long-term ELLs, several are also receiving special education services and receive CTT and SETTS in addition to their regular classes. The remaining long-term ELLs will continue to receive targeted instruction according to their needs and will be provided with numerous opportunities for further language enhancement and refinement with complex and varied literacy tasks. They too, will benefit from strategies such as scaffolding, contextualization, modeling, demonstrations and comprehension checks and will participate in frequent shared, modeled, independent writing exercises, will be exposed to extensive teacher modeling, and the steps of the writing process will be reinforced. ELLs who have reached proficiency level continue to receive support in their content area classes by being programmed into integrated ESL/ELA classes for 225 minutes per week, more than required under CR Part 154. As a result they continue to benefit from the same differentiation, scaffolding and instructional strategies. They are also granted ELL modifications on all tests and exams for two years past the date of their reaching proficiency. These modifications include extended time, separate location, and use of glossary during testing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers use grades 9-12 CCLS-aligned curriculum developed with assistance from the EngageNY website as well as instructional and content coaches. Our classrooms all have SMARTBoards to support ELLs in richer visual representation of the material, and our teachers have access to laptop and iPad carts for instruction. Instructional strategies include modification of the content, process or product to allow students to achieve, as well as a constant focus on academic and content-related vocabulary, as well as literacy. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are given an individualized schedule rather than cohort-based, allowing each ELL-SWD to receive the individually-mandated services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 52  ELA - students are in a push-in/dual-licensed taught ELA class. At the 9 th grade, the course is composed of all ELLs. At the 10-12 th grades, non-ELL students are included to allow higher-level students to meet on-grade-level targets. In addition, we have a free-standing ESL support class, as well as a Literacy support class taught by one ELA teacher with an ESL teacher push-in. As mentioned above, we have created additional Living Environment and Earth Science courses to allow those students more time with the content, vocabulary and language structures. In Social Studies, we have instituted a 10 th grade Global Studies supplemental class to help students with the literacy requirements of the Regents Exam. For Math, we have 4-semester Algebra and Geometry tracks to allow students with difficulties greater time to access the content and vocabulary. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? language In order to meet the requirements of CR Part 154, we program all ELLs and former ELLs for 225 minutes of integrated ELA/ESL per week. This exceeds the requirements for current and former ELLs, but we want to support them with their language needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are discontinuing push-in ESL services in content area classes as we feel that the results did not demonstrate effectiveness, as can be seen by the above data. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL programming aside, our ELLs are given individualized programs designed to help them achieve 4-year graduation, and hopefully an Advanced Regents diploma, as many students come in with the ability to pass the LOTE. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms have SmartBoards, and our school has multiple iPad and laptop carts available for teachers to use in class. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered through the use of bilingual dictionaries, as well as laptops and iPads, available to students in class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Serving ELL needs does not necessitate an easier or lower-level curriculum. Rather, teachers work with students to equip them to with the skills needed to handle grade-level-appropriate work. The support of the Stand-Alone classes provide additional literacy and grade-level appropriate vocabulary support for students across content areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms have SmartBoards, and our school has multiple iPad and laptop carts available for teachers to use in class. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our guidance counselor Ms. Pollio assists all newly enrolled ELLs in their transition to the school both before and during the year. In addition, our parent coordinator, assists in communicating with families in the preferred home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? French, Mandarin Chinese, Spanish, Arabic and German 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 CEP 53  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As our entire school has a focus on literacy, all 9 th , 10 th , and 11 th grade teachers have received professional development around the Hochman method of literacy instruction. These trainings take place throughout the year, starting before the beginning of the year in August/September, during the November, and January Chancellor's PD day, and at our Monday Faculty conferences, content team and grade team meetings. Mr. Orr, our ESL Coordinator, attends monthly coordinator's meetings to ensure compliance as well as to gain information to turnkey to our school's staff, as well as to gain information to lead professional development. Our secretaries, guidance counselors and parent coordinator all attend ongoing Department of Education professional development in helping serve the needs of our ELLs. As our entire school has a focus on literacy, all 9th, 10th, and 11th grade teachers have received professional development around the Hochman method of literacy instruction. This program aids students in understanding and internalizing the fundamentals of writing from fragments to sentences to paragraphs to multi-paragraph essays. The structures aere scaffolded in ways for students of low literacy, including our ELLs, as we have seen the need for in our NYSESLAT results. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Guidance department assists our ELLs as they transition to our school from wherever they come from, at whatever grade level. Upon intake, Ms. Pollio meets with all parents and students to introduce the school and provide an overview of the programs we offer, as well as extra-curricular activities that can engage students' own interests. Our school is implementing a Professional Development Committee, as per the UFT, and teachers will take a lead in researching and implementing staff professional development during our weekly Monday meetings, as well as our Chancellor's PD Days. We create and maintain agendas of these professional development opportunities to ensure that our teachers receive their 15%/50% requirement. On Chancellor's PD days, our ENL teachers go for day-long ENL-specific PD. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our Parent Coordinator ensures parents of ELLs are notified for Department of Education ELL information sessions, and our Guidance Counselors reach out to ELL parents throughout the year with the assistance of an in-house or over-the-phone translator, if necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have monthly Parent Association meetings along with our Open House and Parent Conference dates to foster parental involvement for all parents. Translation is provided either in-house or over-the-phone. 2018-19 CEP 54  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Language and D School DBN: 02M399 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sarah Hernandez Title Principal Lawrence Orr Assistant Principal Octavia Hallett Parent Coordinator Rosemary Fung ENL/Bilingual Teacher Luis Macleod Parent Jennifer Rodriguez/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Bridget Mahoney/Science Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nicole Pollio School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M399 School Name: HS for Language and Diplomacy Superintendent: MarisolRosales The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sonia Wickham Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon intake, the Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, and ESL Teacher, administer the Home Language Questionnaire, as well as conduct an informal interview in English, or a native language with the assistance of a translator (if needed). For Spanish, pedagogues Ms. Colon, Ms. Pineyro assist with translation. Mr. Lin and Ms. Sun assists with Chinese speaking families and Mr. Said will translate for Arabic families. For all other languages, we utilize the Department of Education's over-the-phone translation services. For documents sent home, those generated in-house are either translated in-house, or we complete a Translation Request Form through the DOE's Translation Services. DOE-generated documents are sent home in both English and the home language. We also regularly run the RCPL to see our students' preferred home languages. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 0 4 5 102 0 6 2 2 0 216 4 113 2 1 3 3 3 0 0.86 1.07 21.89 0 1.29 0.43 0.43 8 6 5 55 17 6 2 2 0 22 46.35 216 0.86 4 24.25 111 0.43 0.21 0.64 0.64 0.64 2 1 3 3 3 1.72 1.29 1.07 11.8 3.65 1.29 0.43 0.43 4.72 46.35 0.86 23.82 0.43 0.21 0.64 0.64 0.64 AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH FULANI JAPANESE MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH SPANISH SONINKE THAI URDU VIETNAMESE WOLOF 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 59  N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families September September Monthly September As Needed As Needed Regents & A.P. Schedules Fall & Spring As Needed translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Materials that are DOE generated are distributed in the languages available and as needed by families. The following teachers and staff members are available during meetings and conferences listed to provide translation. Ms. Pineyro and Ms. Colon - Spanish, Mr. Lin and Ms. Sun - Chinese, and Emergency Blue Cards Lunch Forms Parent Newsletters Permission for Photography Walking Trip Permission Slip Voice messages sent by School Messenger Testing Dates Conference Announcements School Specific Events 2018-19 CEP 60  Mr. Said - Arabic. Documents or mailings generated in-house are translated in house with the assistance of the teachers listed above. For all other languages, we utilize the Department of Education's over-the-phone translation services and The Big Word service. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Fall and Spring Fall and Spring Open House Night Parent Conferences School Messenger phone calls Attendance phone calls As Needed College Night Weekly As Needed plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The following teachers and staff members are available during meetings and conferences listed to provide translation. 2018-19 CEP 61  Spring Ms. Pineyro and Ms. Colon - Spanish, Mr. Lin and Ms. Sun - Chinese, and Mr. Said - Arabic. Phone messages can also be recorded by the teachers and staff members and in the languages listed above. For all other languages, we utilize the Department of Education's over-the-phone translation services and The Big Word. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The following teachers and staff members are available in case of an emergency to provide translation. Ms. Pineyro and Ms. Colon - Spanish, Mr. Lin and Ms. Sun - Chinese, and Mr. Said - Arabic. Families can also receive messages in other languages via Pupilpath. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 62  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Presentation of Language Access resources at Monday (2:40-4:00 PM) Professional Learning meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have posted the Welcome Poster at our main elevator. The Parents' Bill of Rights is distributed at the first Parent Teacher Conferences. The Parents' Guide to Language Access is provided in the Welcome Packet distributed to every incoming student. The following teachers and staff members are available during meetings and conferences to provide translation. Ms. Pineyro and Ms. Colon - Spanish, Mr. Lin and Ms. Sun - Chinese, and Mr. Said - Arabic. For all other languages, we utilize the Department of Education's over-the-phone translation services and and The Big Word service. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school welcomes feedback from all parents, which can come either through contact with our Parent Coordinator, or at the monthly PTA meetings. We also have a website and utilize PupilPath, through which parents can contact the school with feedback. 2018-19 CEP 63 
