2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 03M402 School Name: THE URBAN ASSEMBLY SCHOOL FOR GREEN CAREERS Principal: MADELEINE CILIOTTA-YOUNG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Urban Assembly School for Green Careers School Number (DBN): 03M402 310300011402 9-12 145 West 84th Street, NY, NY 212-787-1189 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 212-787-1455 Fax: Phone Number: Daphne LaBua-Stenzel Dlabuastenzel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Madeleine Ciliotta-Young Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Christopher Sedita AnaskaSpears JacquelinIncorvaia AnaskaSpears Eva Taylor Victor Reynoso None 03- Affinity Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, NY, NY Fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3754 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormeliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston-6 th Floor, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Not available Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Daphne LaBua-Stenzel Chris Sedita AnaskaSpears Ashley Felix AnaskaSpears Eva Taylor Victor Reynoso N/A AvivaShapiro Anita Babbitt Amy Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Amanda Ash Jacqueline Incorvaia Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Parent SLT Chairperson/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a small sustainability-themed technical science school with a dual mission of both college- and career-readiness. Our vision is for our graduates to develop into leaders for the emerging 21st Century “Green” Economy — that they be equipped to address our world’s energy-related challenges, the resulting environmental and climate challenges, and can ensure environmental justice and equitable access to resources for all citizens. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The 2018-19 School Year is the 10th year for The Urban Assembly School for Green Careers (UAGC). To achieve our vision, we prepare all of our students to be successful in both college and sustainability-related careers in either Horticulture or Building Science so that upon graduation they possess the knowledge, skills and confidence to determine the most appropriate post-secondary pathway for their lives and futures. Demographically, as of June 2018 our student body is comprised of:  Total 316 students  84.8 YTD Attendance  Approx. 85% eligible for Free & Reduced Lunch  Approx. 25% Students with Disabilities (78 students)  Approx. 12% English Language Learners (37 students)  170 male, 146 female students Our June 2018 Regents pass rates are:  Global: 33%  Earth Science: 23%  Algebra: 21%  US: 47%  ELA: 53%   Living Environment: 45% LOTE: 100% Our August 2018 graduation rate is 78%. Our pedagogical model is Learning Cultures, which consists of a variety of theory and research-based Learning Formats. The Formats support our belief across every classroom, and across every grade level, by framing students’ learning experiences. The Formats are designed to promote student independence, responsibility, cooperation, rigorous learning, and achievement. Our students are given direct access to the standards, the curriculum, and a wide variety of resources with which to meet and exceed the expectations of the standards. By learning to navigate the resources of their classroom, and to communicate and collaborate effectively, students gain the college- and career-ready skills that empower them to both learn and master learning standards, and to promote the learning of their peers. As a part of our rigorous academic program, all of our students are required to complete a 4-year pathway in one of our two technical science majors, Sustainable Building Science (the study of architecture, engineering and construction) or Horticulture (the study of plan science and urban agriculture). Within the following four-year course sequence, students learn sustainability, environmental science, career and financial management, and a range of technical skills including design using AutoCAD, engineering, construction, energy management, 2018-19 CEP 10  horticulture and hydroponic and garden management, as well as the relevant and complementary theoretical science content. For the 2018-2019 school year, these are key areas of focus: Improving literacy rates as per College Ready scores on the ELA and Algebra Regent 1. 2. Continuously reducing the suspension rate 3. Professional development focused on student intellectual engagement 4. Leading through professional development of teachers 5. Increasing Parental engagement 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.  Approx. 85% eligible for Free & Reduced Lunch  Approx. 25% Students with Disabilities  Approx. 12% English Language Learners  Approx. 69.5% of incoming 9th graders score level 1 or 2 on 8th grade ELA exam  Approx 88.3% of incoming 9th graders score level 1 or 2 on 8th grade math exam Since our students come in well below city-wide averages of proficiency, they require intense literacy and math instruction that addresses the needs of diverse learners and provides them with access to the rigor of a college-ready curriculum. In order to close the gap on current student performance and bring students to college-ready levels, our Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners require access to the least restrictive environment. Student need is addressed through the instructional model that allows for student choice, intention and requires that students identify their own needs, strengths and next steps. The work of fully integrating all students and opening the curriculum to allow for the freedom of choice is coupled with a comprehensive social norms program that addressed responsibility. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Progress: Improvement in the August graduation rate from 83-84% (NYS Regents) Improvement in the ELA Regent scores from 68%-82% (NYS Regents)    Continued progress in literacy growth of our students on the Degrees of Reading Power assessment (DRP Scores)  Teacher participation in the Framework for Professional Development (UAGC Professional Development Survey)  90% graduation rate for Students With Disabilities (2018) Areas for Growth:     Increase student independence and rigor within the classroom through a coherent pedagogical approach (NYC DOE Quality Review 1/2018) Improve parent involvement through meaningful tiered involvement options (NYC School Quality Guide 2017-18) Improve teacher independence and agency in the Professional Development Framework (UAGC Professional Development Survey) Increase student attendance from 84% (New Visions "Attendance Heatmap") 2018-19 CEP 11   Increase graduation rate for English Language Learners from 27% (2018) 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M402 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 311 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 11 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 81.7% % Reduced Lunch 12.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 61.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 4% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 59% 79.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES No N/A 127 110 27 84.8% 3.9% 25.4% 27.3% 2.3% 2.3% 4 52% 6 N/A N/A 68% 69% 80.5% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Coherent pedagogical practice that engages all students across contents in activities that promote higher order thinking skills Increase in Regents pass rates in ELA Inclusive classroom instruction evidenced by incorporation of ELLs, SWDs, and mixed-grade level classes. Improved student literacy as evidenced by the DRP   NYS Approved CTE track in Building Science allowing for CTE endorsed diploma options    Quality Review 2018, 1.1 Curriculum- Well Developed “School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula align to the Common Core and strategically integrate the instructional shifts and build knowledge in the disciplines through Unison Reading of complex texts, text based answers, and writing from sources”  Quality Review 2018, 2.2 Assessment- Well Developed “The vast majority of teachers use or create content specific rubrics that align to the grading policy and offer a clear portrait of student mastery or using mastery rubrics. All classrooms use conference, reading records and student self-assessment to check for understanding.” Data:  Quality Review (Jan 2018) rated Well Developed in 1.1 Curriculum, 2.2 Assessment, 3.4 High Expectations  NYC School Quality Guide (2017-18) 4.21 Rigorous Instruction  NYC School Quality Guide (2017-18) 97% positive response on "social emotional" support on school survey  Degrees of Reading Power Assessment increase in 9th graders reading on grade level from 14% to 28% in one year. Needs:  Add 3 AP courses to increase rigor: AP Environmental Science, AP Human Geography, AP US History  Raise Regents pass rates in Global History, US History, Living Environment and Algebra  Consistent implementation of the Learning Cultures formats across the classrooms    Challenge in the highest 1/3 through rigorous accountability in curricula and more rigorous course offerings  Cohort intervention work to attain 90% graduation rate Increase rigor of Mastery Rubrics to align with college ready thinking skills Improve engagement and quality of work products of students in the lowest 1/3 (over-age, ELL, SWD) 2018-19 CEP 14   Increase attendance Data:  Quality Review (Jan 2018) rated Proficient in 1.2 Pedagogy, 1.4 Culture of Mutual Trust and 3.1 Vision for School Improvement  UAGC Curriculum Team reflection and goals  Graduation rate 2018 84%  Attendance 84% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen the rigor of classroom instruction through a focus on literacy as evidenced by an increase in ELA College Ready scores on NYS Regents from 54% to 65% and increase in Algebra College Ready scores on NYS Regents from 27% to 35%. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? August 2018 - June 2019 Data Lead, principal, attendance team Bottom 1/3, ENL students, SWD students, highest 1/3, chronically absent students All staff & students August 2018 - June 2019 Assessment Lead, Curriculum Lead and Team, Department Teams, Teachers, Students Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Attendance Team- weekly  Implement tiered attendance support, starting with advisory where students establish academic and social emotional goals to support school success  Ongoing parent outreach and attendance interventions for chronically absent students Data lead and Principal 1:1s- biweekly Department Teams- weekly Assessment and Principal 1:1- weekly  Maintain Mastery Rubrics and Mastery Based Grading Policy that reflects multiple, unique opportunities for students to demonstrate mastery on outcomes  Degrees of Reading Power- 3x year Department Teams- weekly  Teachers will meet in Department teams weekly using the Looking at Student Work (LASW) protocol to modify curriculum/pedagogy/assessment maps for all students, including ELLs and SWDs Curriculum Lead and Principal 1:1- weekly; Curriculum Team- biweekly  Develop curriculum to reflect student intention, and collaboration (UDL alignment)  Curriculum modifications will be reviewed by curriculum team consisting of Department Leads and Curriculum Lead Gold Team (Graduation Tracking)- weekly 2018-19 CEP 16   Students develop and track long-term and short-term goals with adviser utilizing data (CBMs, DRP, marking period, transcript, Regents and qualitative assessment data) and reflections to update goals track graduation status and college/career readiness (Workout Plan) Programming: All students, SWDs, ENL August 2018 Programming Team  Maintain a double literacy block so that all students have 3 X 73 minutes/week in Reading and 3 x 73 minutes/week in Writing  Heterogeneously mix students to increase full inclusion model (e.g. mix grades 9-12 in reading and writing, offer choice of subject order to mix science and history classes, integrate two  Provide reduced schedule for College Now and internships senior year  Regents Sequencing: modified course sequence to modify Regents exam sequence to allow students to sit for one exam at a time and be completed by senior year if student remains on track  Ensure maximum integration for Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners to ensure access to Least Restrictive Environment Parent Engagement Workshops- biweekly Student/Parent goal setting with adviser- 2x year  Engaging Families and Community through clear expectations for graduation and academic excellence within print and digital Student/Family handbook.  Assign each student an adviser to monitor and facilitate Workout Plans, student achievement and be first point of contact between family and school. Increase parent involvement in Workout Plan goal setting  Parent run workshops and information sessions on school curriculum, pedagogy and grading policy, including classroom visits and student panels 3b – Parent and Family Engagement August 2018 - June 2019 Assessment Lead, Advisers, College Counselor Special Education, Overage, ELLs and College Bound How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will support parent understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core by sending out a monthly newsletter with relevant information, hosting monthly Parent Association meetings, coordinating monthly parent involvement activities aimed at engaging parents in their children's' learning. The Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 17  will manage student advisers (teachers) to facilitate this communication with families. The school will transition to student lead conferences at Parent Teacher Conferences to encourage student ownership of academic progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PROSE application for rotating block schedule, reduced teaching load, increased professional responsibility for teachers resulting in better designed curriculum, assessment and more staff engagement in PD.  Maintain increased ELA teacher count to raise literacy through reading and writing blocks (5 ELA teachers)  Designate Assessment Lead to oversee workout plan implementation, per session activity  Designate Data Lead to oversee data analysis, per session activity  Designation Curriculum Lead and Department Leads to oversee curriculum development, per session activity    Coaching days purchased for consultant on the implementation of Workout Plans and refining observation Full-time college/career guidance counselor Full-time parent coordinator and feedback practices for teachers (inter-visitation and administrators)  Per session available for specialized caseloads, data analysis, and workout plan implementation  College Access for All participation  AP for All participation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students taking ELA and 30% of students taking Algebra will have achieved a college ready score on the Regents examinations on January Regents and Mock Regents in November. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data Analysis report aggregated school wide and disaggregated for specific subgroups (above) consisting of:  Mock Regents (November and March)  Degrees of Reading Power assessment (September, December, May)  Curriculum Based Measures  Regents Pass Rates  Workout plan frequency tracked through plan documentation.  School-wide mock Regents each semester targeting appropriate sequential Regents for each student with pass rates equivalent or higher to scores from last Regents administration Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  Maintain rates of students Not at Risk and At Risk (90-100% attendance)  Attendance incentive programs  41% reduction in suspension rate from 80 in June 2017 to 47 in June 2018  77% reduction in suspension rate from 217 in 2014-15 to 48 in 2017-18  Reduction in hallway traffic through use of "on-call" teachers sweeping hallways     Keepers of the Culture program of peer intervention as a restorative discipline practice  Improved student literacy through increase in Regents pass rates and DRP growth Fully implemented social norms system based on Responsibility Based Self Control Theory Student internships and enrichment opportunities to increase student engagement in school culture Full-time social worker Needs:  To deepen student sense of responsibility and ownership as evidenced by an increase in student-initiated use of the school wide social norms system to self-regulate  To train staff in Responsibility Based Self Control Theory  To more deeply engage parents as partners in understanding the Learning Cultures Model and in supporting our goal of student engagement Lower chronic absenteeism and Improve student attendance to meet 90% attendance rate  To implement student peer accountability protocols to reintegrate suspended students into the classroom   Reduce classroom removals  Targeted interventions for at-risk subgroups prior to suspensions  Implement advisory curriculum that targets school wide social-emotional needs Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will develop our safe and supportive culture through a continued decrease in student suspensions by 17% from 47 to 40 suspensions. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Attendance Team:  Structure attendance team to include staff members who manage tiers of attendance interventions  Enlist parent involvement on attendance team through incentives for parents/families  Attendance team coordinate parent outreach for students who are absent or late starting with an email and call and continuing through tiered interventions until it results in improved attendance or a home visit. Advisory Program:  Implement advisory program to ensure that 1 staff member is responsible for the attendance of a small group of the same students daily.  Advisers take attendance 2x a day and report discrepancies directly to pupil accounting secretary for parent outreach  Advisers refer attendance reports for chronically absent and severely chronically absent students to administrative team for further intervention  Advisers act as single point of contact for parents and maintain accurate records of parent contact information.  PD through Restorative Justice Coordinator- SSOPE initiative School-wide Social Norms Program:   September: Whole school Social Norms Talk with all students September-June: Teachers report student behaviors through Jumprope comments, dean follows up on interventions, teachers respond to comments  October: Full implementation of Keepers of the Culture peer intervention program Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students as well as subgroups of increased behavior infractions September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, AP for Behavior, Social Worker, Restorative Justice Coordinator, Dean, Teachers chronically absent and severely chronically absent students, all students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP for attendance, Restorative Justice Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Advisers all students, recidivist suspended students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Social Worker, Restorative Justice Coordinator, Dean, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  October-June: Continuous PD for teachers on social norms implementation, Responsibility Based Self Control Theory  Maintain teacher assist program so that majority of classes have two teachers to provide more small group and one-one instruction: SS, Science, ELA and math classes will be heterogeneously mixed wherever possible establish social norms and active learning environments  Principal and Assistant principal coaching, residencies, labsites, intervisitations and PD video archive  Identify specialized caseloads for increased intervention, including at-risk grades 9-10 students, using established metrics and previous year attendance  Weekly advisory phone calls  Daily teacher phone calls in response to the Ladder of Over-age, ELL, SWD, identified at-risk Self Regulation classroom response system September 2018 - June 2019 Gold Team, Code Blue Team & Assessment Lead 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will support parent understanding of Supportive Environment by sending out a monthly newsletter with relevant information, hosting monthly Parent Association meetings, coordinating monthly parent involvement activities aimed at engaging parents in their children's' learning. The monthly newsletter will be via email, allowing parents to take surveys, interact with important links and directly communicate with the school about interest in participation in parent engagement activities. The Parent Coordinator and advisers will utilize Friday afternoon parent engagement time to host workshops run by teachers and students for parents, host meet and greets for parents to socialize and host office hours for school administration to meet with parents regarding their concerns. The parent newsletter and other pertinent information is sent to parents via text and email through the Remind App. The assistant principal regularly sends mass and individual text messages to parents regarding student progress, attendance, safety, celebrations and school events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Maintain comprehensive attendance team  PROSE status to incorporate a large block of parent engagement time on Friday afternoons  Maintain full time Parent Coordinator  Maintain position of full-time dean    Provide per session and prep coverage for Assessment Lead  PROSE program approval of on-call period built into teacher schedule SSOPE Initiative: Restorative Justice Coordinator Full time social worker 2018-19 CEP 21   Maintain specialized counselor to do Junior and Senior Guidance Counseling and conduct college and post-secondary counseling  Two appointed Assistant Principals, one of Administration and one of Special Education Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will measure improvement in a supportive environment by suspensions measured at 20 students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SOHO reports Attendance reports Social-emotional classroom assessment New Visions tools: DEXPRO, Attendance Heatmap Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  2018 Quality Review: 4.1 Teacher Supervision, Well Developed "School leaders and teacher peers support the development of teachers with effective feedback from strategic use of frequent cycles of observations, intervisitations, residencies, lab sites, and the analysis of student work and data. Feedback to teachers accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps."  2018 Quality Review: 4.2 Teacher Teams, Well Developed "Teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning and collaboration increases the instructional capacity of faculty and results in increased student achievement levels and graduation rates."    School Quality Snapshot 2016-17: 90% responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers School Quality Guide 2017-18: 4.55/5 Collaborative Teachers. School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey: 97% of teachers report positive peer collaboration, 84% report positive quality of professional development Needs:  Add AP classes to increase rigor of rubrics and assessments in Spanish, US History and Human Geography  Meaningful collaboration with other schools (NYC School Survey)  2nd Year - Percent of School's Lowest Third Earning 10+ Credits 76% (2016)  2nd Year - Percent of Students Earning 10+ Credits 86.8% (2016) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration that supports each learner will lead to improved student achievement as evidenced by a 9% increase in average credit accumulation in the second year for the Lowest Third from 76% to 85% earning 10+ credits. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan  Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and PD 1:1- weekly Teaching community Aug 2018-June 2019 PD Lead and Administration  Professional development (PD) lead organizes the framework for PD; PD Lead establishes and implements an accountability system to show participation and growth  Teacher PD cohorts built into the block schedule to allow for increased classroom visitations and peer coaching  Engage students in labsites and intervisitations, specifically to evaluate the intersection of task, environment and learning activities. Department Teams- weekly  Teachers evaluate student work through department teams to adjust curriculum and assessment to incorporate more rigor Attendance Team- weekly; Gold Team- weekly  Regularly incorporate data for chronically absent and severely chronically absent students into team protocols  Teacher teams set goals around rigor and achievement benchmarks for chronically absent and severely chronically absent students.  Teachers regularly analyze marking period data for bottom third students, tracking progress toward accumulating credit Teaching and student community Aug 2018-June 2019 KOC, Teachers, Students Teaching community Aug 2018-June 2019 Assessment & PD Leads, Attendance Team  Establish onboarding program consisting of summer New Hires school internship, early access to online resources, residency and coaching priority support in first semester August 2018 - January 2019 PD Lead, Admin, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will support parent understanding of Collaborative Teachers by sending out a monthly newsletter with relevant information, hosting monthly Parent Association meetings, coordinating monthly parent involvement activities aimed at engaging parents in their children's' learning. Parents will be invited to visit classrooms, participate in curriculum development through the SLT and will work closely with student advisers on meeting student achievement benchmarks (see goal 1). Parents will participate in student lead conferences that highlight student achievement as well as goals for academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  AP for All- adding 3 AP courses including funding for Peer Collaborative Teacher to oversee implementation  Model teacher  PD Lead per session 6-8 hours per month per lead position  Debrief per session 4 hours per month per teacher  Coverage pay 4 hours per month per teacher  Consultant funding for LC coaching Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will experience an improvement in teacher practice as evidenced by 90% of students on track to earn 10+ credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Administrative observation reports  Pulse Surveys administered during weekly PD  100% of leadership positions receive 360-degree feedback by January 2019  All leadership positions meet city-wide principal approval average (82%) by January 2018 based on 360 feedback  NYC School Survey Results  Marking period reports  Attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  41% reduction in suspension rate (2016-17 to 2017-18)   50% of staff in teacher leader positions including 1 model teacher and 1 peer collaborative teacher (NYC DOE Increased graduation rate from 60% (2016) to 84% (2018) Teacher Leadership positions)  NYC School Quality Guide: Effective School Leadership 4.34/5  NYC School Survey 90% of families say principal is strongly committed to shared decision making  NYC School Survey 96% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school  NYC School Survey 100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning  NYC School Survey 100% of teachers say the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders Needs:  Reduction in chronically absent students from 25-20%   Streamline attendance team to deliniate attendance accountability for every staff member Job performance accountability for every leadership position in school (non-instructional staff) through development of rubrics  Engagement of all staff and stakeholders in decision-making, through meaningful parent partnerships  Quality Review 3.1 rated Proficient: Increase family and partner involvement in tracking and meeting school goals Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will experience an improvement in teacher collaboration through professional development on 3c, engaging students in learning, resulting in an increase in the average numeric score in the HEDI rating scale from 2.8 to 3.0 average. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Principal and Lead 1:1s- weekly  Establish lead positions in Assessment, Curriculum, Data and maintain regular 1:1 check ins to ensure that school-wide goals related to student achievement are communicated and action plan is executed school-wide  Administration conducts quarterly State of the School Address for teachers and other stakeholders to analyze progress toward meeting school-wide goals, communicate the vision of the school and to evaluate student achievement for student subgroups.  Regularly monitor and analyze attendance data through Behavior Team, Attendance Team, graduation tracking (Gold Team), and teacher teams  Principal participate in department teams and curriculum team to regularly analyze data from student work and curriculum materials using established protocols. Summer 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal August 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Leads August 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leads SWD students, ENL students, bottom 1/3, highest 1/3 SWD students, ENL students, bottom 1/3, highest 1/3, students off cohort SWD students, ENL students, bottom 1/3, highest 1/3, students off cohort  Weekly PNews is written with contributions from Leads All staff on priorities and actions September 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Teacher Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will support parent understanding of Effective School Leadership by sending out a monthly newsletter with relevant information, hosting monthly Parent Association meetings, coordinating monthly parent involvement activities aimed at engaging parents in their children's' learning. Our School Leadership Team (SLT) will meet monthly to share priorities and create action plans that involve all stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Lead Teacher per-session   Travel budget for conference and presentations  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Model Teacher  Funds for parent events, workshops and meetings 2018-19 CEP 27  PROSE status to allow for more professional time for teachers to evaluate data, refer students at risk and engage parents in meaningful goal setting with students around progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will experience an improvement in teacher collaboration as evidenced by an average numeric score in the HEDI rating scale in the evaluative indicator 3C to 2.9. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pulse Surveys administered during weekly PD  100% of leadership positions receive 360-degree feedback by January 2019  All leadership positions meet city-wide principal approval average (82%) by January 2019 based on 360 feedback  NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 69% parent participation in NYC School Survey 2017-18 NYC School Survey 2017-18 increase in parent reporting strong family-community ties from 2.58 (2016-17) to 3.06 (2017-18) Needs: Increased parent involvement through cold calls, home visits, events outside of school building Scheduled and facilitated parent workshops determined based on parent need    Parent/family celebrations including graduation, awards ceremony, potlucks, showcase, talent show, incoming student welcome events  Parent participation in PTA increase to 25  Implementation of tiered parent involvement programs including volunteer work, PTC, PTA/SLT and leadership, celebrations Increased communication with parents via email, including student achievement data, updates on school practices and invitations to parent programs  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase family and community ties through increasing parent engagement to 80% of parents/families engaging in at least one school sponsored program. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Design Parent Engagement Programs to meet diverse needs/requests of parent population: Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal  Parent Teacher conferences  Workout Plan meetings with adviser  Parent night  Monthly community events (themed celebrations)  Parent workshops  PTA meetings  Parent potlucks  Volunteer opportunities: chaperone trips, student activities, host workshops, volunteer in classrooms Engage new parents of incoming 9th graders in PTA through Spring and Fall orientation Parents of new students Summer/Fall 2018 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal Develop and deliver parent FAQs around curriculum, grades, academic achievement and school expectations. Parents and Students Summer/Fall 2018 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal  Revamp Parent Teacher conferences to be student centered, reflecting the school’s beliefs about how students learn  Parent Coordinator host parents, ensure signed up for Jumprope, lead workshops on Mastery grading and guide parents through student work products to increase opportunities for parents to initiate conversation around their student's progress. Parents and Students November 2018 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session for teachers to attend orientations and PTA meetings  Parent Coordinator position and support   Assistant principal of administration SLT Participation Budget Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will engage our parents as partners as evidenced by 40% of our parent population attending at least one school-based parenting involvement initiative. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent survey to generate interest in activities, workshops and volunteer opportunities PTC Attendance November 2018 at 65% PTA Attendance- 15 parents by February 2019 5 parent workshops by February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Writing CBM, DRP and Regents pass rates, classroom assessments Writing CBM,Regents pass rates, classroom assessments Writing CBM,Regents pass rates, classroom assessments Writing CBM,Regents pass rates, classroom assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Credit Accumulation, Attendance, Progress Reports, Regents Pass Rates Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Unison Reading, learning conferences, Small Group/One-One During school day Small Group/One-One Small Group/One-One During school day During school day Small Group/One-One During school day Small group/One-One During school day writing conferencesand writing share Unison Reading andlearning conferences Unison Reading andlearning conferences Unison Reading andlearning conferences Mastery based grading, Workout Plans, Counseling referrals, Mandated Counseling 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PTA will assemble “Go Bag” to include:  Book bag  Toiletries (including feminine hygiene)    Metro cards for parents to attend school functions Sweatshirt, t-shirt, socks Snacks Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 Students in Temporary Housing (October 2018) We are a Title I school- does not apply 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  We are a Title I school- does not apply 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school- does not apply 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Hiring team for teacher recruitment through 4-round screening process after initial identification through resume searches: o Round 1: Phone o Round 2: In-person interview with hiring committee o Round 3: Classroom visit observation and practice with feedback (replacing demo lesson) o Round 4: Debrief and interview with principal 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PD lead organizes weekly lab-sites, inter-visitations, and debriefs. Principal conducts weekly lab sites and residencies. PD Lead establishes and implements an accountability system to show participation and growth. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not TA school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 35  Not TA school Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not SWP school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Distributed Leadership Structure, lead by steering committee, incorporates all teachers through department teams that meet weekly to monitor assessments using the Looking At Student Work protocol, evaluating the results to improve assessment. These evaluations are communicated to the steering committee through the Curriculum Team, and evaluated school wide by the teacher Data Lead and individual implications for students by the teacher Assessment Lead through the workout plan structure. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal $192,501 $12,366 x x 2018-19 CEP 36  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $2,602,799 x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 37   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Urban Assembly School for Green Careers in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Urban Assembly School for Green Careers will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Urban Assembly School for Green Careers, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 41  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 43 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: The Urban Assembly School for This school is (check one): DBN: 03M402 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 61 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The supplemental Title III program will have 2 distinct components, explained below. [Estimated instructional cost would be: (3 teachers) x (15 weeks) x (2 hours) x (5.523) = $9,950.] Component 1: Entering/Emerging ELLs Speaking/Listening Class Rationale for Component 1: Our school currently has X Newcomers and 16 Entering or Emerging ELLs (based on 2015 NYSESLAT data), 9 of whom have very limited English language proficiency. In addition to using NYSESLAT scores placing them in the lowest two levels, the ENL teacher has also administered the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 4th ed. and the companion Expressive Vocabulary Test to provide further data provided by these assessments. Results revealed that the 9 ELLs mentioned above—the ones targeted in this component of the Title III Program—all scored at or below the expected vocabulary base of a 5-year-old. These assessments, like the Speaking portion of the NYSESLAT, on which low scores were prevalent for them, do NOT require a student to read or write during the assessment. For this reason, and to meet the key ENL objectives described in the Performance Level Descriptions found in the next paragraph, the rationale behind this component of the Title III Program is to improve both speaking/listening skills and vocabulary acquisition in our lowest ELP ELLs. Essential to our rationale is the need to better improve the targeted group’s performance, particularly though not exclusively, in the following NYSED Grades 9-12 Performance Level Descriptions (rev. 09/30/15): “Students can participate in discussions about academic topics.” “Students can determine information in grade-level spoken discourse.” “Students can determine the development of ideas in grade-level spoken discourse.” Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: 1. In keeping with our integrated classes found school-wide, all grades—9-12—will be served in each class. 2. The subgroups served include the following: Newcomers, Entering ELLs, Emerging ELLs, and students with very limited phonemic awareness and literacy skills in English. Schedule and duration of program 1: 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information This component of the program will run from October 2018 to June 2019. Classes will meet after school from 3:45 – 4:30 on Wednesdays and 2:33-3:43 Thursdays. Language of Instruction: English will be the primary language of instruction, though there will use—particularly, though not exclusively—for clarification and directions, of Spanish (via the ENL teacher) and Bengali (via Google Translate audio and free DOE on-demand phone interpretation). The Portuguese-speaker has high fluency in Spanish listening/reading, and will also have access to the same to translation and interpretation resources mentioned above for the Bengali-speakers. Number and types of certified teachers: Our certified ENL teacher, Tim Bredl, and one ELA teacher will be the teachers for this component. At least 50% of direct instruction will be from the licensed ENL teacher. Materials: • American Headway, 3rd. ed. “Starter” level. The series includes a USB drive of audio files, video files, and interactive vocabulary and assessment-generator possibilities. There is also a student workbook. Given that most of the targeted students for this group have neither wifi nor a computer at home, the hardcopy text and workbook will provide student-friendly resources for homework. • Online content and various ENL apps for iPad; NYSED glossaries and a range of text and picture dictionaries. All classes have smartboards and laptops as well. Rationale for Component 2: Science Curriculum/Content Focus Due to the underperformance of UAGC’s ELLs on Regents exams--in particular ELA exams--the second component of our direct instructional program will focus on supporting ELL's achievement and development of their academic English in Science. We will accomplish this by continuing the after-school Regents prep intensive program. Students will gather in small groups in classrooms in our school and collectively read content texts (textbooks, journal articles, relevant fiction etc.) and watch videos related to the science content. We will purchase level-appropriate science materials as well. We will channel some of our Title III money towards a subscription to the online toolkits for a variety of ELL-accessible modalities. We will also purchase picture dictionaries and Intermediate Dictionary of American English to scaffold ELLs’ comprehension of content. The rest of the direct instruction funds will be used to pay per-session to the two teachers who staff the classes. At least 50% of direct instruction will be from the licensend ENL teacher. After school will run from 3:40 pm to 4:40 pm. Complementing this will be a series of ELL-focused field trips that tie into material supporting ELLs’ achievement and development of academic English in Science. For example, ELLs preparing for the Living Environment Regents Exam will be taken to the nearby Museum of Natural History to observe, write about and discuss the exhibits on the Hall of Biodiversity. These field trips will run during the time set aside, or extended, for this component of the Title III Program. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The students served will be those ELLs (currently 47), at all 5 levels from Entering to Commanding, as per the NYSESLAT, in all grade levels (9-12) identified by their classroom teachers as at risk for failing the Regents; included will be any potential Newcomers. 1. ELLs ALSO at risk of failing Regents in their home language TOGETHER with other ELLs and non-ELLs working on non-English Regents content. 2. ELLs, who will take the Regents in English, but are at risk of failing. Schedule and duration of Program 2: This component of the program will run Tuesdays and Thursdays from November 10 to June 7, 2017, (prior to June 13-22 New York State Regents). Classes will meet after school from 3:40 – 5:40 on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Language of instruction: The language of instruction will be English for those students choosing to take the regents in English or Spanish for those who choose to take the regents in that language. Resources, such as NYSED glossaries will be available for students taking the Regents in another language. Additionally, we will, through the Translation and Interpretation Unit, have a Bengali and Portuguese interpreter on site for our two Bangladeshi and one Brazilian newcomer, and Entering (all 3). Number and types of certified teachers: In keeping with our successful co-teaching model, after-school supplemental instruction will be co-planned and executed by two content teachers, determined by license, availability and interest, in conjunction with our licensed, ENL teacher, Tim Bredl, an ELA Teacher and a Science teacher. Types of materials: • Bilingual copies of NYS Learning Standards for Science classes, and NYSED content-area glossaries, including lists of English/Spanish false cognates. Our school has ample visually-rich science materials and manipulatives to use as well. We also have new MacBook Air laptops to access video and other infographic content for both researching and for creating Prezi presentations to the class. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: RATIONALE: 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development Our PD goal is an ENL one throughout the DOE: how to best disseminate ENL teaching/learning information/strategies within our highly organized teaching model of Learning Cultures, with integrated and co-taught classes, in which every teacher has ELLs they teach. ENL STUDY GROUP: ENL Strategies for Teachers of ELLs Books: Collaboration and Co-Teaching: Strategies for English Learners by Honigsfeld & Dove (2010) and, in keeping with our Learning Cultures curriculum, access to hours of online videos and numerous texts at the designated Litmos.com site. This material addresses both curriculum, formats, structures and learning/teaching in our school. There are components directly related to ELLs, language learning and ELA. This site is free for staff at our school. Teachers to receive training: All 3 teachers in the Title III Program; the ENL Teacher, ELA Teacher and Science Teacher. Schedule & Duration: 3 dates: February 14, March 14, April 19: 3:45-5:00. Topics to be Covered: 1. What are the Essential Components of an Integrated, Collaborative ENL Program? 2. How do teachers plan, instruct and assess ELLs collaboratively? 3. Reviewing and evaluating integrated, collaborative ENL Programs. Each of the 3 topics is found as an entire chapter in the book above; additionally, each topic has correlative content related to our curriculum (online video and text) in the Litmos.com site mentioned above. Name of Provider: As mentioned in rationale, providers will be the 3 teachers and online videos/texts of experts in the field. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We have already experienced success initiating a parent/family ESL class targeting the non-English-dominant and bilingual families of our school community. Although no interested families will be turned away, the population directly targeted are the parents, guardians and families of ELLs in our school, along with the ELL students themselves. We will use Title III funds to , and use a small amount ($250 or less) for refreshments and materials. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Schedule and Duration: The class will continue to meet 3 Saturdays: February 11, April 1, and June 3, from 9:00 to 11:00 pm (unless the participants request a different day/time to better accommodate their schedules) and serve all interested families. Topics to be covered: 1. Supporting your child with homework in any subject even if you do NOT speak English yourself. (The focus here will be on NL parent strategies that can assist in English language acquisition for ELL families.) This will include an overview of our school Learning Cultures curriculum. Interpretation will be provided to all. 2. What exams/requirements are required of my child to graduate HS? This will include ELL accommodation. 3. What to do over summer to continue and improve English language learning? NYC resources and supports for ELLs over the summer with English language and content-area subjects will be included. Name of provider: The provider will continue to be ENL teacher, Tim Bredl along with teachers and/or admin, parent coordinator, depending on the type of information and resources being disseminated and discussed on that particular Saturday. How parents will be notified: Parents will be notified through bilingual flyers mailed home and backpacked, through personal phone calls made by advisers and a pre-recorded robocall. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Persession Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 0 N/A Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. $879 Instructional materials: Picture dictionaries, educational toolkits 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $11,487 $12,366 N/A N/A Translation and Interpretation services N/A 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Urban Assembly School for Green Careers Borough select one School Number 402 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Madeleine Ciliotta-Young Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tim Bredl Teacher/Subject Area Kate Louis/English Teacher/Subject Area Anita Babbitt/Math Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Daphne LaBua-Stenzel Coach N/A School Counselor Michael Campanelli Parent Unknown Parent Coordinator Maria Soto Field Support Center Staff Member Duane Wardally Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 324 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.35%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? [The data portion of this LAP, as noted at the end of this document, does not reflect current data as we have been unable to access last year’s NYSESLAT data to fully respond. We have made repeated attempts with DOE support but have not yet gotten this data, but hope to do so. Once this is done the form will reflect that data dn the narrative will be duly changed to incorporate the interpretation of that data and its clear impact on instruction and programming for ELLs. We regret this.] To assess early literacy skills of ELLs we make use of the following: Estrellita, ECLAS-4, Literacy Resources (2014) Baseline Assessment; DRP online. Insights provided by the data are, via DRP, that most students in the school—ELL, non- ELL—are reading below grade level. Two students were found to have baseline English literacy skills of student entering Kindergarten. The school’s instructional plan will be informed by data on early literacy skills—via above assessments—by drawing attention to the need for further focus on improving those literacy skills. In particular, the inability of 2 students to even attain baseline kindergarten phonemic awareness skills precludes having them read and discuss grade- level high school texts. We have 2018-19 CEP 54  therefore implemented at least two practices to address this: the ENL teacher provides targeted literacy intervention, currently sound/letter awareness/phonemic awareness; and he has been sharing strategies for non-linguistic means of presenting/sharing comprehensible input in content-area classes as well as targeted spoken and written input. These 2 students are Bengali- speakers with SIFE status, who have been showing very real improvement in ongoing batteries of early literacy interventions and assessments. For example, they’ve gone from being able to name 1/3 of the letters to naming all since September, and have gone from 0 sound/letter correspondence to nearly 20 each. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have therefore implemented at least two practices to address this: the ENL teacher provides targeted literacy intervention, currently sound/letter awareness/phonemic awareness; and he has been sharing strategies for non-linguistic means of presenting/sharing comprehensible input in content-area classes as well as targeted spoken and written input. These 2 students are Bengali- speakers with SIFE status, who have been showing very real improvement in ongoing batteries of early literacy interventions and assessments. For example, they’ve gone from being able to name 1/3 of the letters to naming all since September, and have gone from 0 sound/letter correspondence to nearly 20 each. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ELL success is evaluated on a weekly or biweekly basis in the Code Blue team meetings attended by administration, guidance, ENL teacher, gened teacher and special education teacher. We evaluate the success of the program for ELLs by their progress on assessments; and the successful incorporation of our ELL program within our school-wide Learning Culture formats in adherence to NYSED and DOE mandates and objectives. The range of assessments used here to measure progress as program success includes NYSESLAT progress, with an eye to progress not just within proficiency levels, but also across the 4 modalities broken out in the RNMR; in-class assessments; the DRP reading exam, which is administered 3 times a year charts detailed data for progress reporting; Regents scores; PPVT, EVT, ECLAS and literacy assessments for low-literacy SIFE students; and—importantly and unique to every Learning Cultures school—the collection and review of Unison Reading group discussions, 1:1 Learning Conferences and 1:1 writing conferences, which detail progress with student-generated/student- written clearly targeted goals for current work. These form a very real battery of ongoing records of assessed progress and student-driven reflection on their own learning and own learning goals, which inevitably also includes every student’s reflection on their own progress. In short, our school’s program’s success is data-driven, reflection-driven and brought to weekly department meetings, weekly staff meetings and a genuine school community drive to implement changes based on weekly analysis of student work/reflections. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Learning Cultures structures are in place—the collection and review of Unison Reading group discussions, 1:1 Learning Conferences and 1:1 writing conferences, which detail progress with student-generated/student- written clearly targeted goals for current work. These form a very real battery of ongoing records of assessed progress and student-driven reflection on their own learning and own learning goals, which inevitably also includes every student’s reflection on their own progress. In short, our school’s program’s success is data-driven, reflection-driven and brought to weekly department meetings, weekly staff meetings and a genuine school community drive to implement changes based on weekly analysis of student work/reflections. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses a comprehensive RTI model. Tier I and Tier II are the Learning Cultures Formats-small group instruction, small group literacy, 1:1 conferences and academic contracts. Tier III includes academic interventions, behavior interventions and higher frequency of Learning Cultures Formats. RTI and AIS for ELLs is driven by data generated by the following: the assessment tools found in item 1 of this LAP section; NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Spanish Lab, Regents, and all in-class assessments. The home language, in all 4 modalities, is also brought into instruction through the use of bilingual texts, glossaries, online video content, peer-to-peer communication as well as over-the- phone interpretation when needed. For our SIFE students we provide key socio-emotional support as well. This is done through both occasional pairing, for example with our two current SIFE students, of Newcomer SIFE with other, more EL-proficient, students with the same home language/country as well as 2018-19 CEP 55  conscientious pairing/grouping of these students with all peers in the school with a targeted goal of better integrating them in the school community. This includes encouraging their participation in many of the after-school clubs we have as well proactively encouraging their integration into the groupings so essential to our particular school form of instruction. All instruction is the Learning Cultures Formats, therefore the student has agency over learning and the learning is tailored specifically to a student's need. The student is able to identify their point of confusion and problem solve around that point of confusion so the second language development is always considered instructionally. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, Regents ELA and Regents Math, Degrees of Reading Power, Curriculum Based Measures 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All instruction is the Learning Cultures Formats, therefore the student has agency over learning and the learning is tailored specifically to a student's need. The student is able to identify their point of confusion and problem solve around that point of confusion so the second language development is always considered instructionally. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program consists of integrated classes: we have all grade levels, ELLs, Non-ELLs, ELLs-SWDs, SWDs are all in the classes. Our certified ENL teacher, Tim Bredl, co-teaches with Kate Louis, an experienced ELA teacher. Together they teach Reading and Writing courses in which every Entering and Emerging ELL is serviced. ELLs in the 3 levels beyond Emerging who might not serviced in these co-taught courses, are serviced by having the ENL teacher push in to the content area classes they are in b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Content is delivered through the Learning Cultures formats: Mini lesson, small group instruction, Unison Reading, 1:1 conferences, writing, the share. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are evaluated throughout the school year in either home language or English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 56  ELLs are evaluated constantly through the Learning Cultures model. It is a social model that requires the teacher to take dialogical records which are evaluated weekly 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is inherently differentiated in Learning Cultures. Students engage in whole group, small group and 1:1 research based instruction that focuses on student agency and intention. The Learning Cultures Formats are Minilesson, Unison Reading, Independent work time, Learning Conference, Genre Practice Writing, Writing Conference, Responsibility Teams, Share. SIFE students’ instruction in differentiated in our current year by addressing their low literacy abilities. We would clearly differentiate instruction depending on the SIFE students present at the time. Currently we are provided targeted work focusing on phonemic awareness skills with regular progress monitoring recorded online. Their current English literacy skills place them in the early Kindergarten range. Newcomer needs invariably include socio-emotional ones, which we address through having peers shadow students on their first day to assist with negotiating the school and also to provide peer support. They are encouraged to take part in any after-school clubs and sports teams the school also has. Developing students run the risk of becoming Long Term ELLs so we target the modalities in which they were weakest on the NYSESLAT to improve those skills. We also review all assessments done with the students and confer with teachers on their progress. Long Term ELLs have their cases reviewed by the ENL teacher for flags that may go beyond ELP concerns. For example, we currently have some Long Term ELLs who are rarely in school, thus a clear flag that language instruction is not taking place, nor, we’d assume is progress in language development towards the NYSESLAT level of Commanding. Former ELL progress continues to be monitored for progress in class work and on their Regents. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Learning Cultures: Students engage in whole group, small group and 1:1 research based instruction that focuses on student agency and intention. The Learning Cultures Formats are Minilesson, Unison Reading, Independent work time, Learning Conference, Genre Practice Writing, Writing Conference, Responsibility Teams, Share. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students engage in whole group, small group and 1:1 research based instruction that focuses on student agency and intention. The Learning Cultures Formats are Minilesson, Unison Reading, Independent work time, Learning Conference, Genre Practice Writing, Writing Conference, Responsibility Teams, Share. Students who need more frequent teacher interaction will be scheduled for it in all core courses. Students who are further struggling will engage in more frequent academic interventions with an adviser biweekly. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 57  Students engage in whole group, small group and 1:1 research based instruction that focuses on student agency and intention. The Learning Cultures Formats are Minilesson, Unison Reading, Independent work time, Learning Conference, Genre Practice Writing, Writing Conference, Responsibility Teams, Share. Students who need more frequent teacher interaction will be scheduled for it in all core courses. Students who are further struggling will engage in more frequent academic interventions with an adviser biweekly. Intervention programs included targeted literacy work on phonemic awareness and fundamental literacy skills in English for students with low literacy and/or no familiarity with our sound/letter system. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on careful evaluation of the various program changes being made this year, (see above #12), we will consider what to discontinue and what to continue. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Seeing numbers 12 & 13 above show both the changes made and the need for revision at the end of this year, based on monitoring and evaluation of our current program all throughout the year both with admin and all teachers. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. They have the option to join sports teams and to also participate in after-school programs, such as poetry performance, photography, LGBTQ group, writing, college readiness, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Laptops, desktops, translation/interpretation services, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL and all classes there is an understanding that bilingual dictionaries, cell phone apps/internet searches, NYSED content glossaries, bilingual printouts of student-chosen texts are welcome in classes. Students have options to respond, depending on the task, in English, the Home Language or even both. At times peers interpret and translate. The ENL teacher also employs the home language in strategic ways mentioned above as well as use of Google Translate, on-demand phone interpreters content-area writing at times. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services are met through meeting regularly with the ENL teacher, programmer and administration to ensure students are progressing and programs they are enrolled in are successful. Our classes all have students from all grades in a heterogeneous setting. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Laptops, desktops, translation/interpretation services, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Orientation, school teachers. PTA meet and greet, parent coordinator. Before the school year starts all students attend the school to familiarize themselves and their parents with our unique Learning Cultures curriculum and learning formats. Peers, including ELL peers, simultaneous interpretation and translated texts are provided. Students who arrive new during the school year are assigned a student ambassador ( who will, when possible, speak their language if the ELL has low ELP, who will escort them the first day to classes, lunch and interact with them. All students are encouraged to participate in the many clubs and 2018-19 CEP 58  sports teams we also have in the school. Parent coordinator addresses parent and student, the counselor, advisor, student ambassador and ENL teacher all are involved in this introduction, as is the administration. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. Any other language (online). 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development framework consists of teacher leaders, including an ENL leader. They meet regularly to review curriculum based on trends in student work. Teachers sign up for labsites to see the ENL teacher model teaching moves with ENL students. We teach under a highly organized teaching model called Learning Cultures, developed to increase student agency. It can serve ELLs effectively, but only if implemented carefully. Given our co- teaching model and integrated ENL program, all teachers serve our ELLs for at least some portion of their teaching time. Thus, our Title III professional development funds will continue to be put towards paying for coverages so that all staff to visit the ENL teacher&#39;s classrooms and participate in lab sites there. Another key element of our rationale is to meet an ongoing goal throughout the DOE: how to best disseminate ENL teaching/learning information/strategies within our highly organized teaching model of Learning Cultures, with integrated and co-taught classes, in which every teacher has ELLs they teach. Professional development will be for the entire staff, in keeping with the rationale described above. Special emphasis will be placed on training the teachers who will be leading the supplemental instruction program described in part B above. Those teachers will have an opportunity to have their class covered by a substitute once a month (from November 2016 to June 2017) in order to observe ENL students in reading and writing class and sections of Global History. (The ENL teacher co-teaches with an experienced ELA teacher and service over 2/3 of all ELLs in the school in their classes each week. Every Entering and Emerging ELL in the school is in their classes. To repeat, our classes include ELLs and non-ELLs with a mix of 9th-12th graders.) We use a debrief protocol after labsites to examine teacher practices according to Danielson frameworks and internal Learning Cultures rubrics. When these labsites form part of our Title III Professional Development as here described, the following documents are also present to both inform and guide staff one ELL Policy and learning: NYSED Performance Level Descriptions for speaking, listening, reading and writing; CR Part 154 requirements/mandates; descriptions of the English Language Proficiency Levels. This training will run continuously for the duration of the school year. This type of work literally runs all year round in our school, as as we also have summer training for both recently-hired teachers as well as for all teachers. Teachers trained by participating in lab sites will then in turn share their knowledge and commitment to practice when they serve as the hosts of future lab sites. Some of the topics to be included in the Friday, 2:25-3:35 all-staff PD, as well as targeted monthly labsites include: ENL best practices and theory (including language acquisition, SIOP, and the brain and vocabulary learning); cursory overview of current NYSED CR Part 154 mandates and Performance Levels; strategies that encourage and facilitate the use of ELLs’ home language along with English in their learning in the school and at home; and the use, discussion, revision and development of scaffolds, graphic organizers and front-loaded vocabulary, prior knowledge, content to support all ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 59  Important also will be topics such as the appropriate differentiation for different subgroups (Newcomers, with their particular learning of both language and cultures; all 5 ELL levels; SIFE students and the need to see SIFE status both along with and apart from ELL status; differing literacy skills from ENL ones.) Additionally, the ENL teacher will attend relevant professional development offered by the Department of English Language Learners (DELLSS) and turnkey that training to the general staff, especially the teachers through the school. Weekly ELA Department meetings on Tuesdays during the school day also lead to protocols that promote looking at student work and our teaching practices within the Learning Cultures model. This key structure—an integral part of our school teaching/learning practice—smoothly transitions into focused work and professional development, as detailed above, on ELL supports within this Title III Professional PD. Curriculum writing through the curriculum team, steering committee and department teams. All teachers participate and all curriculum is directly aligned to the CCLS. The professional development hours are built into the school day. Teachers receive coaching, participate in labsites, meet with and receive coaching from a consultant and can attend outside professional development when necessary. All documentation is kept with the Professional Development Lead. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students receive counseling, guidance counseling, an adviser and a transition to high school unit in the health curriculum. The professional development hours are built into the school day. Teachers receive coaching, participate in labsites, meet with and receive coaching from a consultant and can attend outside professional development when necessary. All documentation is kept with the Professional Development Lead. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs meet individually with the ENL teacher and parent coordinator at the "back to school night" orientation. Langauge development needs are reviewed in the student's workout plan with the adviser and the parent. interpretation and translation are provided through the DOE interpretation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PTA holds parent workshops and encourages ELL parents to attend. Translation is always available and a bilingual parent coordinator fosters relationships with Spanish speaking parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. As mentioned at the beginning of this LAP, we have had a long unsuccessful struggle to access our last year’s NYSESLAT scores, despite support from our DOE contact persons. Once this is resolved, this entire form will be duly revised: first, all the missing data will be included, and then that data will analyzed and inserted into the narrative as it clearly must inform instruction and programming here. {On an additional note, the entire document that was completed on this form was lost in a Microsoft Word glitch today and had to be recreated from scratch. Over the coming days, that version will be recreated to make the much deeper narrative/responses required. Where there are now sentences there were paragraphs.} 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Madeleine Ciliotta-Young, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Assembly School for Gree School DBN: 03M402 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Madeleine Ciliotta-Young Principal Daphne Labua-Stenzel Assistant Principal Maria Soto Tim Bredl TBD Kate Louis Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Anita Babbitt Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Mike Campanelli School Counselor Fred Walsh N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Duane Wardally (Urban Assembly) Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 09/14/18 09/14/18 On Leave 09/14/18 TBD 09/14/18 09/14/18 N/A N/A 09/14/18 09/14/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M402 School Name: UA School for Green Careers Superintendent: Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Many of our school's parents are English Language Learners and the primary home language is not English. In order to correctly collect this data for oral and written communication between school and student we use the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports and student emergency contact cards to determine the home language of the parent. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 64 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic, Bengali, Hatian, Fulani 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Parent Coordinator sends home monthly newsletters that also includes other communication home to parents. This includes but is not limited to letters regarding attendance policy, dicipline policy, information about upcoming school events and information about curriculum and pedagogy. All communication is distributed within the first week of each school month. The documents are translated into Spanish by the school Parent Coordinator and are translated into other languages when requested. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parents who come to the school for attendance meetings, IEP meetings, discipline meetings and parent interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 65  teacher conferences all come through the main office which is run by the parent coordinator. Calls that are made home to all parents are translated by a telephone service. Any informal interaction with a parent, including phone calls that need translation, the schoo will use the DOE over the phone translation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school fulfills all parental notification requirements by translating parent documents, providing them in the main office, back packing them home with students on the first day of school and mailing them home over the summer and again in January. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents complete a mock parent survey and are continuously surveyed by the Parent Coordinator and PTA in order to better serve their needs. 2018-19 CEP 66 
