2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M408 School Name: PROFESSIONAL PERFORMING ARTS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: KEITH RYAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Professional Performing Arts School 02M408 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310200011408 6-12 328 West 48 th Street 212-247-8652 School Number (DBN): 212-247-7514 Fax: Keith Ryan KRyan5@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Keith Ryan Joseph D'Amico John Young Joseph D'Amico NA none Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, NY, NY VOrlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3900 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, NY, NY YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (212) 247-7514 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Keith Ryan Joseph D'Amico John Young none NA Aaliyah Alcibar Jhanique Fontenelle Kathryn Tornelli Terri Cadet-Donald Andrew Jackal *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabbie Feldman Carl Sievert Michael Gatton Charles Vassallo Morgan Neville Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ CSAschool leader Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Professional Performing Arts School is committed to nurturing each student's passion for the performing arts and thirst for knowledge by providing a safe, supportive community that inspires lifelong learning and a commitment to serving local and global communities. In all activities PPAS students and staff are guided by the values of empathy, engagement and excellence. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. When students develop as performers, they gain the skill and power to improve the world through their artistic expression and ability to collaborate and lead. An environment of professionalism is essential, and since our inception in 1990 PPAS has offered students in grades six through twelve a unique opportunity to study the arts with professional artists. PPAS students follow a daily schedule of rigorous academic work at school each morning and intensive performing arts instruction at professional studios each afternoon. Partnerships include The Ailey School for dance, Rosie’s Theater Kids for musical theater, Waterwell Theater for drama, and National Chorale for classical choir. PPAS strengths, accomplishments and challenges: ● Strengths and Accomplishments: o 2018 Graduation Rate: 94%. o PPAS attendance rate consistently exceeds 95%. o PPAS students attend competitive 4-year colleges and conservatories. Some PPAS students join professional arts organizations immediately after graduating, particularly dance companies given the demand for young dancers. o Regents scores are consistently far above average. Regents pass rates are high. 2017: ELA: 99% Algebra: 100% Global History: 92% US History: 94% LE: 91% o All HS students take a 4-year arts sequence worth 16 credits which ends in an NYCDOE arts-endorsed diploma. o Academics offers a humanities sequence (combination of ELA and social studies) that ends in a 15 page research paper on a student chosen public policy, preparing PPAS graduates for college-level writing and research. o PPAS math sequence is from algebra through calculus. o There are opportunities to take seven Advanced Placement Courses: Chemistry, Physics, Literature, Biology, US History, English and Calculus. PPAS is part of the NYCDOE AP for ALL initiative. o PPAS has a 9 th Grade 1 semester Freshman Forum course that orients 9 th grade students for success in high school including the beginning of college preparation. o PPAS has a college guidance department that informs a 9-12 th grade college prep process and gives 11 th and 12 th graders one-to-one support throughout both years. Challenges: Although a majority of students at PPAS reach a level of mastery aligned with the NYC DOE College Readiness Index, too many students are not meeting these benchmark levels of mastery. 2018-19 CEP 10  Specifically, there is an achievement gap where our Black and Latinex students are performing at lower levels. Although this reflects a wider and recognized achievement gap in the city, we identify this as an area of challenge that we want to erase. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PPAS enrolls students with Individual Education Plans, the majority of who are served in Integrated Collaborative classrooms. These students make up 15% of the students population, and do not meet the same level of CRI as the remainder of the student body, so they are a focus of our efforts to meet our goals. We also have the goal of minimizing, if not erasing, the achievement gap between Black/Latinex students and the rest of our student population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made the greatest progress in student achievement, specifically in the area of College and Career Readiness with a 10% increase in College Career Ready students from 2017 to 2018. This remains an element that needs more growth, along with decreasing the achievement gap for Students with Disabilities and Black and Latinex students. Areas of focus are in Rigorous Instruction, particularly in the use of instruction feedback to students and student-teacher interactions in the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M408 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 565 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 16 12 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 36.0% % Attendance Rate 31.9% % Reduced Lunch 0.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 21.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.23 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 82.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 89% 91.8% 24.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A NO N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 59 61 30 92.9% 4.1% 14.9% 21.2% 6.5% 8.1% 2 28% 6.1 80.3% N/A 94% 95% 100.0% 48% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: Data Points:  Grade Books  Quality Review Indicators  Attendance/ Lateness Records  Parent Engagement Records  Advance data Summary of School Needs: Areas where school shows strengths : o 94% High School students graduated in four years o 99% High School students graduated in six years o 4 year High School persistence rate is 94%. o The High School exceeds targets in student performance. o 94% of students complete advanced courses. o Post secondary enrollment is 88% over 2 years after graduation. o Average ELA Regents score is 82%, even with comparable schools. o Average Global History score is 84, 5 points higher than comparable schools. o Average US History scores is 84, 1 point higher than comparable schools 2018-19 CEP 13  Areas where school needs growth :  College Readiness is at 72%  Average Algebra score for 2018 dropped to 4 points below comparable schools.  Graduation rate for student with disabilities is 81%.  College and Career Readiness for our lowest 3rd academic performers is 4 points below comparable schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  3% more students in general will meet College Readiness benchmark. 10% more students in our lowest 3rd of performers will reach College Readiness benchmark which will decrease the achievement gap for Students with Disabilities and Black and Latinex students. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Leaders through observation, evaluation, feedback and professional development will ensure that pedagogues and subject area teams are aligning curriculum and implementing innovative strategies, primarily in the area of feedback to students and student-teacher interactions to address the Common Core Learning Standards. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Struggling students Sept - Jan All supervisors, support staff and teachers Data manager will dig deeply with math and science teachers into student performance information to assess priority areas of growth All math/science students October - March School Leadership and teacher teams, data manager PD will be tailored to the needs of strategically grouped teacher teams: looking at student performance data and work together to inform lesson planning All math/science students Nov- May Lesson plans will be evaluated and modified based on data assessment Nov-May All math/science students School Leadership, PD team, data manager, teacher teams. School Leaderhsip, PD Team, data manager, teacher teams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will leverage our parent evening events: curriculum nights, parent teacher conferences, SLT and PTA meetings and our powerful communication tools to increase understanding and community support for classroom expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. o Common Planning Time: Collaboration among teachers and school leaders is essential in meeting the stated goals for rigorous instruction. The following are resource items that will/can be leveraged: ● Monday Professional Development Sessions 2018-19 CEP 15  ● School-wide teaching programs/schedules have much built in common preparation and professional periods o Research-based and CCLS aligned materials such as books about key instructional focus: assessment, differentiation, universal design, supporting students with learning disabilities and integrated collaborative teaching including: Brookhart's Effective Feedback, NYC Social Studies Scope & Sequence, The Common Core Learning Standards by the Common Core Standards Initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Tracking and and analysis of modification and improvements in student performance through the lens of feedback to students and teacher-student interactions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher instructional action plans that include short, medium and long term goals including teachers' individual monitoring plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Comprehensive Assessment: o Quality Review and Snapshots. o Environmental Survey Results 2017. Summary of School Needs: Areas where school shows strengths : o 96% of students completed the school survey o 83% of students believe they are given help when needed o 89% of students feel that teacher believe they can do well in school Areas where school needs growth : o 78% of students feel the school helps them approach challenges by suggesting appropriate strategies o 79% of students feel that the school helps them reflect on strengths and learn areas that can be improved o 75% of students believe the school is teaching them the organizational skills they need to succeed in school o 50% students feel the school makes them excited about learning Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strengthen the capacity of all staff to advocate for equity for all students, particularly students that have historically met inequities in school environments, ours included, and in in the larger community and society, and to understand as our students regarding what they contribute to our classes as members of groups: gender, racial, ethnic, cultural. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Courageous Conversations PD for staff on issues of racial equity.  Courageous Conversations PD for staff regarding implementation and participation in Courageous Conversation forum for students SWD and Students not meeting CRI Novemeber-June School Leaders, FHAO representative SWD and Students not meeting CRI November - June School Leaders  Courageous Conversation forum for students SWD and Students not meeting CRI October - June Teachers, School Leaders, Student Leaders September - May Teachers, School Leaders Highlighted subgroup investigation in Inquiry Teams and relationship to inequities and closing the achievement gap SWD and Student not meeting CRI 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 18  We will continue to leverage our powerful communication systems: Skedula, Pupil Path and School Messenger to improve communications and we will offer additional opportunities to educate the school community in our instructional foci. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. o Common Planning Time: Collaboration among teachers and school leaders is essential in meeting the stated goals for strong family and community ties. The following are resource items that will/can be leveraged: ● Professional Development Sessions ● Time and organizational materials allocated for collection of student work samples ● School-wide teaching programs/schedules have much built in common preparation and professional periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Short term and medium term data analysis: student achievment data and survey data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In depth analyses of Freshman Forum topic study and subsequent reports that will inform necessary parent communication, Academic Intervention, or social emotional support. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School was rated highly effective in Teacher Team work via the Quality Review. Priority is for teams to focus on school instructional areas of feedback to students and student-teacher interaction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher Teams will engage in student inquiry that will lead to a 3% improvement in College Readiness benchmarks. 10% improvement for lowest 3rd academic performers to decrease the achievement gap for Students with Disabilities and Black and Latinex students. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Differentiated PD Grouping. Inquiry in the instructional focus area of feedback to students and student-teacher interactions. Special Education focus on transitional element of IEPs and real effectively implemented plan for transitioning students with disabilities to post-secondary college and /or career. NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers for all students All students in inclusive settings Sept-June All teachers Sept- June All teachers in inclusive classrooms How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will leverage the use of our powerful communication tools to provide better understanding of how teachers work to provide a cohesive instructional team, including both vertical and horizontal collaborations. Targeted family training events will be scheduled throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD committed hours Mondays And Tuesdays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 21  Inquiry will include the evaluation of mid year assessments where a growth measurement will be taken on taught subjects with the target of 3% increase making College Career readiness benchmarks on those topics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student academic performance measurements: tracked classroom tests, mid year regents exams. Internal school survey resutls. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders will be accountable for assuring tracked progress monitoring for targeted groups of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School Leaders will implement accountability and support in the area of assessment that will lead to a measurable increase in the use of formative assessment (at least one measured assessment per week per class) connected to a planning modification. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monitoring of Danielson Framework application in observation cycles All students and teachers Sept-June Principal and AP Counseling and programming improved workflows All students Sept - June Counselors and Intervisitation for teacher development of leadership 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Progrmeer All Studentss Oct- March Targeted Teachers for leadership and growth needs. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will leverage the SLT, PTA and our powerful communication tools to increase the understanding and commitment of our school mission and how we lead that mission through daily leadership work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy school funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. mid year internal surveying from Black and Latino Male Task Force and Equity Team. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 24  ISR Itema Analysis, gradebooks, formative assessment, assessment of student work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 86% of parents say school builds trusting relationships 84% of parents say school communicates with them about their child's performance Priority: PPAS needs to communicate more about what parents can do to help their children succeed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. A series of targeted family events will be planned to help support the student achievement goal of a 3% increase in College and Career Readiness. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Improve messaging regarding attendance and lateness all students Sept - June All teachers, support staff and supervisors, advisory teachers Teachers, support staff and supervisors We will leverage the use of our powerful communication tools to provide better understanding of how teachers work to provide a cohesive instructional team, including both vertical and horizontal collaborations. Targeted family training events will be scheduled throughout the school year. All students Sept-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Waterwell Theater; Rosies Theater Kids, National Chorale, The Ailey School and Ballet Tech all have parent outreach plans coordinated with PPAS. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Targeted tracking of students aligned with parents targeted for parent education in January 2019. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment of survey results, pta and slt agenda and follow through. Assessment of student achievement in targeted parent groups. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) RTI RTI RTI RTI RTI Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) student work assessment student work assessment student work assessment student work assessment assessment of student behavior and need inclusive classrooms during school and after school inclusive classrooms inclusive classrooms inclusive classrooms group and individual counseling during and after school during and after school during and after school during school 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 33  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Professional Performing Arts High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Professional Performing Arts High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Professional Performing Arts High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 37  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Professional Performing Arts School Borough Manhattan School Number 408 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Keith Ryan Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jesse Perlemutter Teacher/Subject Area Bridget Kiernan/SE Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Sale/English Related-Service Provider Stacey Goodman Superintendent Marisol Bradbury Assistant Principal Heather Lawrence (IA) Coach NA School Counselor Caitlin Kelly Parent Parent Coordinator Teresa Gindi Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 548 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.18% 2018-19 CEP 42  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use locally developed assessments designed by our ESL teachers to assess the literary skills of our ELLs. We have found that these assessments most closely align with the academic expectations of our particular classrooms and help us to formulate literacy plans for each ELL. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We triangulate data (class grades, anecdotal information, Regents, and NYSESLAT scores) to assess the growth of each student. We also survey the ELLs to get feedback from the students. 2018-19 CEP 43  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We don't have patterns because we are only looking at one student, but we do regualrly assess her achievement data (anecdotal, in class grades, Regents scores, state exam scores, and NYSITELL scores). What this data reveals is that our current ELL student is able successful and growing in her ability each year, but seems to struggle with the NYSITELL test itself. Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. A. collaborative, self-contained, sheltered B. ungraded, heterogenous b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have two ESL licensed teachers on staff. One of them is currently scheduled to teach our ELL student and the other helps with NYSESLAT admnistration in spring of each year. ESL class is scheduled for 5 days a week for 43 minutes a day. ELA class is also 5days/week and 43 min/day 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have a very small population of ESL students so we have only one teacher who provides all the mandated minutes of services (although some students receive additional minutes through an out-of-school provider. The curriculum and instructional methods are aligned with the NYS ESL/NLA standards. Strategies engage students in activities of active, cognitive challenge and require students to demonstrate their thinking. 2018-19 CEP 44  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Meeting the needs of diverse learners enrolled including SIFE, Students with Special Needs and all levels of ELLs. Below we outline our non-negotiable elements that assure classroom instruction in our language program is meeting the needs of all students. • On-going tracking of individual students’ language skill evidenced by: o Bi-weekly assessments that identify students TESOL and ELA level o Graphs and/or charts placing individual students on a continuum aligned with language acquisition benchmarks • Developmentally appropriate challenge and rigor evidenced by: o Lessons that include targeted strategies for specific student learning needs as identified by regular assessments o Ability to modify instructional activity based on ELL need o Planned and prepared strategies and materials for diverse learners on a spectrum from struggling students to high achieving students • Teaching of skills and knowledge needed in content area evidenced by: o Use of instructional strategies identified by grade teams that incorporate content area vocabulary and concepts o Lesson plans and instructional strategies that are aligned with and model the content area lessons and instructional practices A classroom where these elements are effectively incorporated will look different than a traditional teacher-centered classroom. The environment of the programs for ELLs will be defined by student choice and teacher guidance. The teacher will tier instruction in such a way that when students enter the room they will have various choices about how they access and move through the learning objective. Choices will generally be made regarding the level of English or foreign language that the student can comprehend. Because there are four areas of communication associated with language (hearing, reading, speaking and writing) and students will have varying proficiency among them, they will have access to each mode of communication at different levels. Below is one high leverage strategy that will be used in the language programs. Three levels of proficiency: low to high Speaking choice Listening choice Writing choice Reading choice Level one Confer with teacher Green audio/video Writing prompt 1 Meet Martin Luther King Level two Confer with partner Blue audio Writing prompt 2 Martin Luther King: Man and Mission Level three Discuss in group Black audio Writing prompt 3 MLK: A Short History The objective of the unit is for students to use English to express their opinions and ideas from a variety of perspectives (NYS ESL/NLA Standard 3). For this lesson the teacher has decided to use the life of Martin Luther King to illustrate the viewpoint of peaceful demonstration. The teacher chose three levels of books on the subject of MLK, wrote three writing prompts of varying degree of difficulty, and found three videos or recordings about MLK. In this example, students may choose one way to access information by reading, writing or listening, and then choose one way to practice speaking about the topic. The teacher will guide students in making the most appropriate choices based on her thorough understanding of individual student capabilities in the language. Note that in this example, the teacher will be working specifically with the lowest level speakers in a one-on-one setting. Higher level speakers will have more responsibility in monitoring their own work. This strategy is one high leverage approach to meeting the needs of all learners. Teachers will use other strategies such as leveled groups, conferring, targeted group instruction, partnering and interest-generated activities so that all students are engaged and working toward shared goals. In the example above, the teacher may have chosen the topic of Martin Luther King because the students are studying the civil 2018-19 CEP 45  rights movement in social studies. The teacher will emphasize vocabulary and concepts related to the social studies unit while focused on language skill. This underscores the importance of team planning and building common planning time into our master schedule. Content Area Classes – Supporting Diverse Learners in the Core Curriculum Content area teachers must tackle the challenge of meeting the needs of diverse learners while preparing students for the demands of the content area standards. The nature of language programs will present diverse language need, and preparing for this will be a major focus in our instructional planning. In addition, we are aware that students will have different levels of experience in the content area knowledge and skills. Therefore, the approach to teaching core classes must include: P l a n n i n g f o r d i v e r s e l a n g u a g e c a p a c i t y P l a n n i n g f o r d i v e r s e s k i l l a n d k n o w l e d g e i n c o n t e n t a r e a An essential attribute of our pedagogy is that the non-negotiable elements in the areas of both support classes and core classes co-exist and serve as our main reference for common planning among teachers on the same grade level. For instance, grade teams should be comparing assessments from language program classes to assessments from core subject area classes in order to fully understand a student’s learning needs and plan appropriate instruction for that student. Though similar to those for the support classes, the non-negotiable elements for meeting the needs of diverse learners in our core classes are worth listing here • On-going tracking of individual students’ content area skill and knowledge evidenced by: o Bi-weekly assessments that identify students understandings of prerequisite and current content area topics with a significant awareness of how language capacity is related to understandings o Graphs and/or charts that place students against the standards for the content area • Developmentally appropriate challenge and rigor evidenced by: o Lessons that include targeted strategies for specific student learning needs as identified by regular assessments o Ability to modify instructional activity based on content area need and language need o Planned and prepared strategies and materials for diverse learners on a spectrum from struggling students to high achieving students • Teaching of prerequisite skills and knowledge needed to meet grade level standards in content area evidenced by: o Use of instructional strategies identified by grade teams that incorporate language support where necessary o Lesson plans and instructional strategies that allow students access to information necessary for them to participate and succeed in performance tasks Therefore, teachers of core classes will provide multi-leveled support that includes planning for diversity in both language capacity and content level understandings. Continuing with our high leverage strategy of providing student choice, a sample of what this might look like in a math class is below: Levels of Math Understanding Language Support Material Math Support Material Learning Group Need for foundational skill Full translation Base practice Teacher led Need for some review Vocabulary list support Ramp up practice Individual work Grade level – fully prepared for math topic No language support New work only Group work Students entering this math class will have choice in the area of language support by utilizing available materials. Students will also have choice in math support in both materials and working groups. The teacher’s role is to guide students to the appropriate supports and then participate in targeted teacher led instruction and activities. In this case, the most struggling students are in a targeted group and the intermediate students are doing individual work. Groupings are flexible and can be utilized in various ways in on-going lessons. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? See #6 above. 2018-19 CEP 46  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? See #6 above. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention center is called the Learning Center and it provides academic support or intervention to students who need or request support of this kind. The Learning Center has a well-equipped, quiet work location with staff assistance available as needed in a variety of formats, which are discussed below. The Learning Center provides an array of services that are fluid and flexible depending upon students’ needs. The Learning Center works in partnerships with parents, students, and teachers in a consultative role and as a service provider. Services available at The Learning Center include: • Study groups: Small group classes (less than 8 students) that support struggling students, and give them time to complete their assignments. • A menu of tutoring options – Regents testing, current coursework, study skills, organizational issues • Lunchtime tutoring • Academic Counseling: • Support with ongoing coursework The Learning Center has a bank of computers and a printer station for students’ use. In addition, textbooks from all academic classes are available here, as well as reference books for the Regents tests, college admissions, an assortment of reference books and literature, as well as teacher resources. Students and staff also have access to tools, school supplies and some art supplies. Who comprises The Learning Center staff? The Learning Center full-time staff is made up of Learning Specialists who each focus on another level of the school and who also coordinate tutoring at lunchtime and during 7th period. In addition, PPAS recruits tutors from a variety of sources to help support TLC teachers • America Reads Tutors: College students from NYU and Fordham University participating in Federal work-study program. • Community Tutors: Adults from local community organizations (such as the JCC) who volunteer their time here at PPAS. • Peer tutors: High-achieving 10-12 grade students earn transcript credit for helping other students during Lunchtime tutoring. Translated materials are available n our Learning Center and through our tutoring program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ESL teacher has established both targeting learning goals and assessment goals that will inform on going assessemnt and necessary modifications to meet those goals. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have the same access to all services as all other students. They are all enrolled in performing arts programs after the academic day ends and they are encouraged to attend shows and concerts as all students are. They are included in all outreach to attend dances and other school events and are surveyed and along with the rest of the student body when it is time to do programming preference sheets and other acadmic advising. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 47  We have a growing library of books in Chinese and some movies with Chinese subtitles. We have ESL textbooks and workbooks and books on tape. We have ordered NYSESLAT test prep books. We use google docs to share tutoring and instructional materials (such as translated powerpoints) with the ELL subgroup. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Chinese and Spanish language support is available through tutors and contect area teachers (when possible) to aid students in their native language skills in the ESL program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our school's support services and resources are age and grade appropriate, as we have materials and services for students ages 11-17. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have a growing library of books in Chinese and some movies with Chinese subtitles. We have ESL textbooks and workbooks and books on tape. We have ordered NYSESLAT test prep books. We use google docs to share tutoring and instructional materials (such as translated powerpoints) with the ELL subgroup. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Because the bulk of our school’s ESL population is part of the Juilliard pre-college program, we have a unique opportunity to partner with them and offer these newly enrolled students an orientation to PPAS, the NYC DOE and our policies and procedures. We give them a tour, go over our PPAS handbook and take questions about the ESL and regular program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Elective language classes in Spanish are offered to ELL students if their programs allow for it. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1 and 2. DAY ONE: Learning Walks Introduction: Teachers read “ Learning to Walk, Walking to Learn” by Richard Lemons and Deborah Hesling with the following questions in mind: • What can I learn from being observed? • What can I learn from being an observer? Activity: Teachers will view a 15 minute film of a first year teacher delivering a lesson. Groups of 3 will then practice providing feedback as if the teacher was with them, while other teachers observe the meeting. We will debrief then another group will 2018-19 CEP 48  model the feedback meeting, cycling through so that all participants have a chance to model the feedback session and debrief. Rationale: The core of our PD will be Learning Walks and we want understanding of the practice and protocols, and to give teachers an opportunity to experience and question the process. DAY TWO: Looking at Student Work Together Introduction: Teachers are given book Looking at Student Work Together and asked to read chapter 2, “Two Ways of Looking at Student Work Together. Activity: Teachers will work in groups of five that receive portfolios of sample student work and will practice the protocols described in the book. Rationale: Our central organizational development is the work of teacher teams meeting to assess student work and plan lessons and instructional strategies based on the needs expressed in the work. Practicing the prescribed protocols is not to require them, but rather to encourage deep analysis of how we translate assessments to classroom practice. DAY THREE: The Differentiated Classroom Introduction: All teachers will receive a copy of Ann Tomlison’s Differentiated Instruction. Activity: Teachers will work in pairs to deconstruct a sample lesson plan provided to them and rebuild it for a class with a group of ELLs, emerging bi-lingual and monolinguals as well as students with learning disabilities. Rationale: Core to our school is the diverse classroom, specifically the groups above. We appreciate the challenge in planning for such classes, encourage the practice, and recognize the important of developing teachers in this area. DAY FOUR: Teaching English Language Learners Introduction: All teachers will receive a copy of Teaching English Language Learners Across the Content Areas. Activity: Working in cross-subject teams of three, teachers will use the book and the work of the previous three days to plan a lesson in each subject area with a keen eye on how ELLs will be able to learn the topic. Rationale: All teachers will have classes that are at least partly enrolled by ELL students. The objective is to build skill in this essential area before the school year begins. DAY FIVE: NON-COGNITIVE SKILLS Introduction: Teachers will read section 2.2 – 2.8 of How Children Succeed. Activity: Teachers will be given two incomplete rubrics that measure empathy and engagement. They will discuss their expectations of how students will engage and interact with others and complete the rubrics by filling in indicators for headings, “approaches,” “meets,” and “exceeds.” Rationale: We want the teachers to engage in deep thinking about our core values and how they envision these values practiced in their classrooms. 3.Our staff receives training in transition for our students and we have a special program called Freshmen Forum that helps our 9th graders transition into high school in general and PPAS in particular. 4. This training takes place laregely on Day 4 of the above plan with supplemental activities scheduled in the weeks afterwards for follow up. See above 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. See above See above Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 49  1. We have a very active parent community who are part of our school leadership team (SLT) and who attend PTA meetings. They participate in fundraising activities, attend many school events (such as shows), and volunteer to help at events like auditions. Parents of ELLs are invited to a yearly "coffee break" to come in a discuss our school, any questions they might have, or the ESL program. We also invite them to participate in our International Day. Whenever possible, we invite them as guest speakers for history/social studies classes. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Classroom visits, parent conferences. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. With such a small number of ELL students we are able to give intense focus to our ELL students and parents regarding quality instruction, student assessement and need and parent need. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Keith Ryan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Professional Performing Arts S School DBN: 02M408 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Keith Ryan Title Principal Heather Lawrence Assistant Principal Teresa Gindi Parent Coordinator Jesse Perlemutter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Bridget Kiernan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Caitlin Kelly School Counselor Marisol Bradbury Maria Broughton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M408 School Name: Professional Performing Arts School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. School documents are available in the appropriate languages. We know a parent's native language by using ATS, the emergency cards and the HLIS. When parents and/or guests are greeted in the main office, it is quickly determined what language they speak. Translators are available for Chinese and Korean speakers as needed. If a parent speaks another language, we will actively recruit a translator within the school building or through the DOE translation unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 53 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Generally there are no serious needs as the overwhelming amount of our parents speak either English, Spanish or Chinese. We have signs posted in various languages outside and inside of the main office to increase the awareness of the different translation services available 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Many of the written documents that need to be translated are available via the Department of Education website. When students and parents are interviewed at intake an immediate assessment is determined as to what language documents is needed. We have also reached out to the Department of Education's office of translation services. We sometimes use in-house staff or parent/other volunteers to translate documents and announcements. The school will provide written translation services by 1) assessing the need for tranlation 2018-19 CEP 54  2) assessing the language of translation 3) adopting DOE policy in order to access all available provided translation services via our counseling office supervised by the AP of organization. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Oral interpretation services are usually provided in-house. If translation for another language is needed, one of the school's Assistant Principals is responsible for securing the services outside of the school in a timely fashion. The Board of Education's office of Translation Services recommends a specific vendor. They need to be contacted about 2 weeks before oral translators are needed (i.e. Parent teacher conferences) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 55  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) See above. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We are implementing an ELL parent questionaire that will include translation services issues. 2018-19 CEP 56 
