2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M411 School Name: BARUCH COLLEGE CAMPUS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ALICIA PEREZ-KATZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Baruch College Campus High School 02M411 310200011411 9-12 School Number (DBN): 55 East 25 th St., New York, NY 10010 212-683-7440 212-683-7338 Phone Number: Fax: Alicia Perez-Katz aperez3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alicia Perez-Katz Aaron Sparrow ShinoTanikawa Ruth Cogan Patty Frisbee N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Marisol Bradbury Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave., New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3700 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: 212-683-7338 Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alicia Perez-Katz Sam Zimmerman ShinoTanikawa Pattie Frisbee XuanLi Han YunYao Ruth Cogan Jennifer Gumina ElinorEggers *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Student 2018-19 CEP 5  Shannon Li Ian Reifowitz Beth Kuffeld Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Student Member/Student Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview We are a community of students, parents and educators dedicated to the development of well-rounded, life-long learners. Our rigorous course of study, enhanced by real-life connections in learning, results in socially-conscious and responsible citizens. Students collaborate in an interdisciplinary program, exploring the relationship between literature, social and natural sciences, mathematics and the arts. At BCCHS, we foster the desire to see things from 2018-19 CEP 9  different perspectives, developing life-long learners. This will be developed orally, visually, and through the written word. Our commitment to high standards empowers our students to be active participants in this transforming world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual information about BCCHS: Baruch College Campus High School (BCCHS) is a college-preparatory high school, in partnership with Baruch College. The school aims to prepare all students for college, with a rigorous curriculum. Staff is paramount in the development of curricula and programs, and classroom instruction consistently involves collaborative learning, broad student engagement, and a focus on critical thinking. School Strengths, Accomplishments: ● We emphasize multiple measures of student learning, valuing project-based learning, socratic seminar, collaborative inquiry and rigorous critical thinking. ● Our Core Values: Global Citizen, Rigor, Community and Real World Connections, link student learning beyond the classroom, encouraging higher order thinking and application ● Our four-year advisory program creates a strong sense of community, where each child is known well by an adult in the building, and students build supportive relationships with their peers. ● Our student-led conferences give students the opportunity to take more ownership over their learning, and set and monitor their goals, along with college-readiness skills. ● There are three guidance counselors, supporting students in social-emotional learning and the college process. ● BCCHS has many external partnerships with community organizations, enriching experiences for our students. ● We have a strong, collaborative culture among staff & students. ● Leadership provides room for teacher creativity, while communicating a clear vision ● Teachers feel supported, and students feel safe. ● Baruchians follow the three E's: Excellence, Extra-ordinariness, and Empathy, both in and outside of the classroom. Challenges: ● With 50% of our parents speaking a language other than English at home, we strive to find resources and partnerships to support our linguistic diversity. ● As a small school, we seek to offer greater course diversity but are constrained by our size. ● Students and staff identified expanding trips to create more real-world connections, and as a way to engage students in learning, and for students, to help make learning fun and to connect to their peers. ● A continued focus on communication school-wide and with families. 2018-19 CEP 10  ● With a growing ICT program, we continue to look at best practices in co-teaching and differentiating instruction to support a wide range of learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have an ICT and SETTS program for students with IEPs, an ENL program for English learners, and we offer speech services, hearing services, Occupational Therapy and have a social worker and school psychologist to support students with IEPs as needed. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of growth from previous year : ● Students accessed rigorous content through Universal Design for Learning. ● Our advisory program was modified to include more opportunities for community building and literacy. ● .Staff engaged in courageous conversations about race. Curriculum was aligned vertically to pre-AP standards. A focus on service learning in classes and learning. key areas of focus for this school Year: ● Students will be given choice and support during the school day with flex time elective blocks. ● 9th grade transition into high school. ● Increasing access to rigorous coursework with AP for All. ● Restorative practices and circles in advisory. Refinement of culturally responsive curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M411 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 460 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 74 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 42.0% % Attendance Rate 36.5% % Reduced Lunch 0.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 13.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 38.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 99% 100.0% 64.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 57 60 95.9% 5.2% 15.9% 4.6% 39.1% 4.1% 0 4% 7 N/A N/A 99% 98% 100.0% 83% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our strengths: ● Our Core Value of Rigor supports our focus on honors-level work for all students. ● Each course uses the same curriculum map format, aligned to the Understanding by Design model, where courses are rooted in Essential Questions. ● All courses follow our school-wide grading policy where there are multiple measures of student learning. ● Our Core Values of Real World Connections and Global Citizenship link student learning beyond the classroom, encouraging higher order thinking and application. ● School-wide, students engage in Socratic Seminar, which is aligned to the Common Core speaking standards and Danielson Highly Effective exemplars for student questioning and discussion. Our needs: ● Students met the college-readiness benchmark,but students with IEPs are not consistently meeting this benchmark, specifically in math. ●with a broad range of learners, we are looking for ways to teach all levels of students at honors-level work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  Teachers and staff will know how to implement daily learning targets in instruction in order to assess and measure student growth. Students will be able to identify their learning tied to the target in class. This will be measured through observation of learning targets, looking at student work and reviewing department teams products of self-assessment tools and curricular shifts, based on data found in quarterly instructional rounds. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will identify a problem of practice and engage in instructional rounds. All classes 9-12 Assistant Principal Lessons will follow the Learning Target model students Students will receive differentiated supports based on student interest and teacher identified need, including integrating targeted supports for students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Department teams will identify a problem of practice and engage in cycles of instructional rounds. students (including SWDs and ELLs) Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September-June Principal, Teacher Leader teachers, Principal teachers October-June September-June October-December – cycle 1 Teacher leaders, teacher teams How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams will communicate to families via google classroom. Families will be invited in to learn about how to access google classroom and instructional methods in both English & Chinese. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: teacher leaders. Instructional Resources: ICT co-teaching modules, Instructional Core book and professional development anchored around this text. Schedule adjustments: common planning time for teacher teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 15  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will be that all classes will have integrated learning targets and are assessing if students have met the learning target. This will be collected by classroom observation, and lesson plan review, along with student performance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom observations for co-teaching will take place monthly with both the Principal and Assistant Principals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. School’s strengths : ● Our four-year advisory program creates a strong sense of community, where each child is known well by an adult in the building, and students build supportive relationships with their peers. ● Our student-led conferences give students the opportunity to take more ownership over their learning, and set and monitor their goals, along with college-readiness skills, (speaking). ● Group work is a key component of all classes, and students learn roles to assist in collaboration. ● We build community and trust with a 9 th grade overnight trip to Greenkill, where students learn to rely on one another. We have a school-wide field day and advisory competitions to increase collaboration and community. ● There are three guidance counselors, supporting students in social-emotional learning and the college process. 2. Needs: there is a need for structured community building, to develop more socio-emotonial tools for students. There is a need for crisis de-escalation training for staff, to support a broad range of learners. There is a need to focus on transitioning 9th graders into high school with more intentionality. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 17  Based on OORS data and Learning Survey data, BCCHS will engage in restorative practices, wherein staff will be able to de-escalate students and students will develop tools to navigate their socio-emotional learning. Systems will be implemented to support student socio-emotional development, including weekly restorative circles in advisory, transition systems for 9th graders and training for staff in crisis de-escalation. All advisories will engage in restorative weekly circles 75% of the year and 4 grade team lead teachers will receive intensive training in de-escalation. This will be measured through advisory visits and quarterly surveys and will result in a decrease in classroom removals and an increase in student engagement for the targeted subgroup. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisors will hold weekly conferences with advises about academic and personal goals. Advisory will engage in restorative circles each Friday, through a school-wide curriculum. Students, advisory teachers Students, advisory teachers September-June advisory teacher leaders September-June , advisory teacher leaders Students will lead conferences around their academic progress, in spring, 2019. Students, parents September-March, 2019 Advisory team leads Advisors will communicate with families, using the Teacher Action Plan as a guide. Parents, advisors September-June, 2019 Principal, assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will communicate with families regularly about student progress during Tuesday parent engagement time. As advisors loop with their students for four years, this allows for each parent to have access to an adult who knows their child well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: advisory leaders summer planning per session, advisors leading conferences. Instructional resources: advisory curriculum. Schedule adjustments: advisory blocked in the teacher programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid year, 70% of advisories will have been meeting in restorative circles weekly and student survey data will point to how restorative circles have led to a stronger sense of community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The restorative justice coordinator will conduct a needs assessment and adjust in November, 2018. The Restorative Justice Coordinator will provide mentoring and support to targeted teachers and classes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School’s strengths: ● Strong, long-standing structures in place for collaborative planning among staff. ● Collaborative team structures are in place to support students in succeeding, as well as planning interdisciplinary connections, and aligning curriculum to the Common Core. ● teacher growth in professional development, through intervisitations, team meetings and teacher led inquiry projects. ● Teachers present at national conferences, including NCTE, NCTM. 2. Needs: ● The development of more fluid practices that can be applied to ICT co-teaching partnerships, allowing for both teachers to have robust roles. ● Teachers need more co-planning time. ● Classes that do not have an ICT teacher (Spanish, Art) need more supports.  The development of instructional systems to support executive functioning deficits in classes is needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will collaborate in ICT classes to support all learners through strategic use of co-teaching models, based on student need and learning targets. This will be measured through lesson plans and classroom observation, with ICT classes utilizing either station teaching or parallel instruction bi-monthly. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Co-planning partners will meet weekly to review curricula for the upcoming week and share differentiation strategies. ICT classes September-June, 2018 Principal, Assistant principal Students will be identified for subgroups that need math intervention and will be programmed to flex supports. Grades 9 & 10 Quarterly Data Specialist Students will be scheduled for flex block supports weekly based on student interest and data. Teachers & students weekly Advisers, classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During curriculum night, teachers will describe the ICT model and cross departmental collaboration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources – Assistant Principal Schedule adjustments – common planning time, advisory, flex programming system. Instructional Resources – models of differentiation, structures shared across departments/grades Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, staff will review student progress and growth indicators based on flex programming. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly team review of flex data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: ● Teachers provided with leadership opportunities - leading department, advisory and grade teams. ● School goals are crafted in collaboration with school community ● Teachers feel supported, and students feel safe. ● Uniformity in expectations across the school allows for students to understand the expectations. 2. Needs: ● A continued focus on communication. As indicated on the learning survey, there is still work to be done in terms of encouraging open communication about school issues. ● Principal needs to be more present in all classrooms and to deepen trust amongst staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Classroom visits will be distributed evenly amongst the principal and assistant principals, in order to align feedback and tie to professional development needs. Teachers will engage in classroom visits by the principal triennially, both formal and informal. This will improve student outcomes by aligning the observational feedback to school-wide priorities and the Instructional Core. The principal trust measure in the Learning Survey will increase to 80% 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Danielson rubric will align to feedback in post-observation conferences so teachers have clear understanding of areas of celebration and growth. teachers October-April Principal, Assistant Principals Teacher feedback will focus on differentiation to support students with disabilities and English Language Learners and the lowest 1/3, focusing on how teachers are incorporating the 4 Rs (relevance, rigor, relationships) to increase student outcomes. teachers, students (lowest 1/3) October- May Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers will share their feedback in weekly staff development sessions on effectiveness and where they need more support. teachers September-June Principal, Assistant Principals School equity team will meet monthly to research how to close the predictable gap between Black & Latino students and their peers. September-June Principal teachers, parent coordinator, student leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will work with the PTA to engage families in the school’s priorities and initiatives. Monthly PTA meetings will feature highlights from the Principal/Assistant Principal on school priorities. The parent coordinator will host quarterly grade-level breakfasts for family member Q & As in English and Chinese. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – mentor teachers, increased administration Instructional resources – professional articles and books Schedule adjustments – 100 minute PD time/flex time, teacher intervisitations 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January teacher survey on principal trust and alignment of feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: BCCHS has several long-standing traditions, which connect family and community to our school, including: school math conference, College Night, incoming 9 th grade orientation, Senior Awards Night, school performances (plays, music), Senior Defenses. Families are engaged through our robust school website, and have access to student data via engrade, an online grading portal. BCCHS has many external partnerships with community organizations, enriching experiences for our students. Our collaboration with Baruch College allows students to take college-level courses while in high school and have access to the college library, as well as athletic facilities. Interpreters attend parent-teacher conferences to allow families that do not speak English to participate in a dialogue. 2. Needs: With 50% of our parents speaking a language other than English at home, we need to provide more opportunities to engage families in multiple languages. Baruch College is able to offer courses through college now, but due to scheduling conflicts, we have not been able to increase student enrollment and/or offer additional courses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BCCHS will hold at least three family college workshops in the mornings, one per marking period, to increase attendance to 30 parents per workshop. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In partnership with a community based organization, we will hold a financial aid night in Chinese. In partnership with a community-based organization, we will hold a college night in Chinese. The school will hold breakfasts families with the principal and college counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Chinese-speaking families Chinese-speaking families all parents January, 2019 College Counselor March, 2019 College Counselor College Counselor October, 2018- May 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Chinese Planning Council, MCC Theater - Parents as Arts Partners grant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Interpreters – The Big Word, school staff. Community-based organization partnerships Food purchased for events, technology & rooms for events. Funding to pay for interpreters, food, copies College office counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, we will have had one meeting in Chinese for families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. workshop topics & attendance rosters Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are below grade level in their 8 th grade ELA test, students academically at-risk Students who are below grade level in their 8 th grade math test or Regents exam, , students academically at-risk Students below level in 8 th grade ELA/Math/Science exam, Regents exam, academically at-risk Students below level in 8 th grade ELA/Math exam, Regents exam, academically at-risk Long term absences, students who are academically at-risk, students with IEPs, students reported by staff with concerns regarding emotional supports. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extended Day, small group instruction, audio books - Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one tutoring After school, flex time Extended day, peer tutors Small group, one-to-one tutoring, senior mentors After school, flex time Extended day, small group instruction, test corrections, lab make-ups Small group, one-to-one tutoring After school, flex time Extended day, small group instruction Small group, one-to-one tutoring After school, flex time Small group During the day, After school Small group at-risk counseling, mandated counseling, mentoring programs 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  we are purchasing graphing calculators for our STH students to use in math classes, as well as counseling and other needed supplies. students are provided with emergency supplies, chromebooks, and books after meeting with the guidance counselor and full fare transportation. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $11220, $477 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly Qualified teachers are hired through a hiring committee, and are supported with a staff developer or mentor teacher. Teachers are assigned in their license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers co-plan and are released for common planning and alignment to CCSS. Mentors support new teachers and those identified in need of support. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Baruch College Campus High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Baruch College Campus High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 CEP 37  Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Baruch College Campus High School, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the (ESSA) programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Baruch College Campus High School Borough Manhattan School Number 411 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alicia Perez-Katz Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melody Kwan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Marisol Bradbury Assistant Principal Gisele Nassif Hanna Coach type here School Counselor Stephanie Smith Parent Abigail Koreto Parent Coordinator Janice Salmeri Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Loriann Nardacci ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 466 2018-19 CEP 42 Total number of ELLs 2 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.43%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 3 K 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We assess our ELLs literacy skills with a teacher-designed baseline assessment. Students are asked to read a text over the summer, and write a response which is assessed as a baseline in literacy skills. Teachers use this data to decide how to group students, and develop goals for the student for the school year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers plan summer assignments in cohort in the spring, and assignments are reviewed with students through advisory in June. Teachers have team meeting time to review baseline data in the fall. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 43  All of the ELLs that have attended our school have passed into Proficiency rating and graduated with Regents diplomas. We continue to evaluate the success on ELL passing rate of the NYSESLAT and academic progress in classes and Regents exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teachers have scheduled push-in time to support ELLs in their program, as well as additional pull-out instructional time during advisory and study hall. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We currently have two ELLs so we cannot notice patterns. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We review the NYSESLAT data with the ENL teacher team and share with the advisors, SBST (both ELLs have IEPs) and use them to inform SBST work and goal setting in academic classes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The program model is block by grade level, heterogeneous. We use the push-in integrated model where the ENL teachers use push-in model in the following classes: Global History and Global Literature. The ENL teachers use the pull-out model when the ENL student is in study hall and advisory. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL program is programmed in STARS and in our school schedule, which is published to the school community. We follow the CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language for grades 9-12. According to the proficiency model, our ELL is in the Intermediate/Transitioning level and they receive 180 total ENL minutes with 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Based on the ENL teachers' programs and the student program, we are able to program the appropriate number of minutes for the students. The ENL teachers use the push-in model in Global Studies and Global Literature. Our class periods are 45 minutes per class. 2018-19 CEP 44  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the push-in integrated model, content is delivered by the main content teacher in English, and the ENL teachers support the student in individual work, note-taking, and assessing comprehension. Instruction is delivered in English. The ENL teachers coordinate with the content area teachers, to share formative assessment feedback and what differentiation approaches will support the ELL student(s). Students work collaboratively in groups, and heterogeneous groups are designed based on data culled from formative assessments. ELLs are also provided with subject specific glossaries and books on tape for English class, to support understanding of the texts. The content area teachers print guided notes and post vocabulary charts in each class. The ENL teachers and the content area teachers collaborate and plan during common meeting periods, grade team meetings and via email to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support, as well as curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. In the pull-out model, instruction is delivered in English. The ENL teachers collaborate with the content area teachers for assignments. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are permitted to use bilingual glossaries on all assessments and given extended time on all class work and assessments. They have translated Regents for the Regents exams in January and June. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. If we had SIFE students at our school (we currently do not), our instructional plan would be to place them in a class with additional supports. Ideally, these students would be placed in an ICT class as a general education student, where they could additionally receive the supports of having two teachers in the room. They would be assessed on their progress and differentiation strategies will be put in place for their classes. They would be programmed to attend after school supports in small-group instruction, and would not be programmed in LOTE, and that time would be used for study skills, enrichment instruction. b. ELLs who are newcomers would be provided with additional time to complete work, and we will purchase texts for them in their native language. They will attend after school small group supports, and be exempt from LOTE (provided that they have met the language requirements) and be programmed into a study skills class. c. For ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years, they will be programmed for additional language supports after school, as well as the study skills class. d. The 6+ years ELLs will be supported with a modified program, where they can focus on gaining acquisition in English and obtaining the necessary credits for graduation. This could include: 3 years of science (instead of 4), with the fourth year focusing on additional language instruction. e. Former ELLs in years 1 and 2, they receive the mandated testing modifications, 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and attend academic after school supports. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher and the special education teachers communicate with each other and have meetings to develop common strategies and supports for these students. The students are programmed into the ICT classes and the ENL teachers push-in to the class with the special education teacher and the content area teacher. Alternative texts are used in content classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 45  The students are programmed to attend all classes with their peers, in ICT classes, as this is the model our school follows, and only be pulled out of class for related services if needed and/or the support teachers would push in to academic classes. Currently, any students with disabilities are not pulled out of core academic classes, and we would ensure the same, as well as the opportunity for enrichment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer after school support for ELLs through our Achieve Now grant, which provides small group instruction and review of content. It allows ELLs to get extra help. These programs are offered in English. After school support is available in math, ELA, science and history and they meet every week. In after school support, we provide homework help, test review, skill building, project help and preview of upcoming lessons. ELLs can attend help and extracurricular activities everyday. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we would like to begin using the periodic assessment for ELLs, as a way to track their progress toward English acquisition 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We currently do not have any services that we will discontinue. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are programmed in the same classes as all of our students, which are taught at the Honors Level. In 11th and 12th grade, all students in our school take AP for All in ELA and science. They receive a letter for mandated after school help. ELLs are also invited to attend all extracurricular activities, which include clubs and sports, via email or school announcements. ELLs may join any club, sport, or other extracurricular activity they wish. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We allow students to use electronic dictionaries, and students are provided with laptops to use during the day, and are permitted to use online dictionaries. They are also provided with content specific glossaries for each class. We also purchase textbooks in the students native language, if available in science, math, history and literature, or alternative texts to assist them in acquiring the content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In freestanding ENL, we allow students to read texts, if available in science, math, history and literature, in their native language, so they can acquire the content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We follow the CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language for grades 9-12. According to the proficiency model, our ELL is in the Intermediate/Transitioning level and he receives 180 total ENL minutes with 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Based on the ENL teachers' programs and the student program, we are able to program the appropriate number of minutes for the student. The ENL teachers use the push-in model in Writing Arts, Math, Global Studies, and Global Literature. We purchase texts aligned to each class, to support ELLs in every grade. For example, a tenth grader reads Dante's Inferno which we purchase the translated copies, whereas an 11 th grader reads Hamlet. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We allow students to use electronic dictionaries, and sutdents are provided with laptops to use during the day, and are permitted to use online dictionaries. They are also provided with content specific glossaries for each class. We also purchase 2018-19 CEP 46  textbooks in the students native language, if available in science, math, history and literature, or alternative texts to assist them in acquiring the content. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All students new to our school are paired with a mentor student, who contacts them over the summer, and meets with them regularly throughout the year to help them transition to school. We also meet with the family, to review the curriculum, assignments and have follow up meetings throughout the year to update them on their child's progress. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff meet in the following configurations: grade team, department team, advisory grade team and whole staff. As a whole staff, we are engaged in rounds of intervisitations, where we examine different strategies. This year, one of the rounds will be on language instruction and acquisition. In addition, we have discussed Socratic Seminar as a staff, and differentiation strategies to support students who are new to English in speaking. We have read professional articles and observed a video of a seminar in one of our classes. In grade teams, teachers discuss strategies to support students, including ELLs that they can put in place across all classes. Our ENL teachers join the English department to share strategies on teaching writing and reading. ENL teachers are provided with opportunities to attend city-wide trainings as offered by the NYCDOE. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The staff meets in grade teams twice a month to discuss curriculum and grade wide skills and concerns. In the beginning of the school year, the ninth grade team discusses how to help students transition into high school. The guidance counselors also meet with the ninth grade team to discuss how to help ELLs transition into high school. Teachers meet 100 minutes per week, and therefore reach the required 15% hours of training. Literacy, speaking, reading and writing strategies are integrated across our professional development (as indicated in #1). Agendas are sent out and attendance is taken at our meetings. 2018-19 CEP 47  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every September, we hold a curriculum night where parents attend to learn about what their children are learning in school, in all subject areas. During this time, they learn about the ENL program and its goals. Parents can also meet with the ENL teachers during Parent Engagement time. Materials can be translated into their native language and interpreters are available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent teacher conferences in the spring are student-led, so therefore, we provide interpreters from the Big Word to provide interpretation during the conferences. All parents sign up online for a time slot and indicate their language needed for interpretation. Additionally, as the large majority of our students who are/were ELLs are Chinese, we host annual college readiness nights with a CBO in Chinese, and host breakfasts with the principal, which is interpreted into Chinese by our Chinese-speaking secretary. Lastly, parents have access to call the school and ask questions by being directed on the phone to press a number to reach the Chinese-speaking secretary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 48 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alicia Perez-Katz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Baruch College Campus High School School DBN: 02M411 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Alicia Perez-Katz Principal Gisele Hanna Assistant Principal Janice Salmeri Parent Coordinator Melody Kwan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Abby Koreto Parent Lori Nardacci/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 50 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Baruch College Campus High School Superintendent: M. Bradbury DBN: 02M411 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Teacher/LOTE teacher Principal Parent Coordinator no yes no yes yes no *Melody Kwan Perez-Katz Janice Alicia Salmeri * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language Identification Survey for new admits; ATS reports and Student Emergency Contact Cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 51  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans Albanian Amoy Arabic Bengali Chinese Any Cantonese French German Hausa Korean Mandarin Maltese Nahuatl English Oneida Polish Russian Spanish Ukranian Vietnamese 2 1 0 2 4 204 0 3 1 1 2 0 0 1 490 0 1 2 13 1 1 0.27 .14 0 .27 .55 27.95 0 .47 .27 .14 .27 0 0 .14 67.12 0 .14 .27 1.78 .14 .14 2 1 6 2 4 108 38 3 1 1 2 51 1 1 489 1 1 2 13 1 1 .27 .14 .82 .27 .55 14.79 5.21 .47 .27 .14 .27 6.99 .14 .14 66.99 .14 .14 .27 1.78 .14 .14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Chinese (Any), English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families First day of school letters August How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Communication for low incidence 2018-19 CEP 52  Curriculum Night overview September Parent Teacher Conference notice October Family Handbook August Regents calendar January/June Graduation letters May langauges wil be translated through pupilpath. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Low incident languages will have documents translated orally at curriculum night through phone line service. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Communication for low incidence langauges wil be translated through pupilpath. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Communication for low incidence langauges wil be translated through pupilpath. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Communication for low incidence langauges wil be translated through pupilpath. materials are translated through the NYCDOE translation unit. Communication for low incidence langauges wil be translated through pupilpath. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher conferences; November/March curriculum night; September college information night; . March financial aid night; October interpretation service(s)? we hire interpreters from The Big Word and use over-the-phone services for low-incidence languages we partner with Chinese Planning Council we partner with Chinese Planning Council and hire interpreters from The Big Word we partner with Chinese Planning Council and hire interpreters from The Big Word 2018-19 CEP 53  at risk guidance conferences ongoing IEP meetings ongoing our bilingual secretary provides interpretation or we use over the phone translation our bilingual secretary provides interpretation or we use over the phone translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The bilingual payroll secretary will call Chinese-speaking families. We also use SchoolCXT, a messaging app that translates all texts and reads aloud. Lanugage Line is a tool to support in person interpretation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We review Chancellor's Regulation A-663 with all staff during the staff PD days in September, and our ENL teachers lead workshops for staff throughout the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We post translated signage in the lobby and distribute all announcements in English and Chinese. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the Annual Parent Survey. Translated surveys from the DOE language page will be shared with families. We began using translation headsets this year to facilitate participation in large-scale meetings. 2018-19 CEP 54 
