2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M413 School Name: SCHOOL OF THE FUTURE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: STACY PAIGE GOLDSTEIN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School of the Future High School 310200010413 School Number (DBN): 02M413 6-12 Grades Served: School Address: 127 East 22ndst Phone Number: 212-475-8086 Fax: 212-475-9273 School Contact Person: John Fanning Stacy Goldstein Email Address: jfanning@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Jeremy Copeland LucieKota, Buffy Davis AaraMenzi Not Title one school PercyRanaivohajarivo, Nathaniel Guerrier Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Manhattan Youth District Information Geographical District: Consortium Affinity Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: Kathy Pelles 335 Adams St. Brooklyn, NY 11201 KRehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 917-861-1095 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Consortium Executive Director: AlexandraAnormaliza Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston st.Brooklyn, NY 11201 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-5668 Fax: 718-935-5941 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stacy Goldstein Jeremy Copeland LucieKota Percy Ranaivohajarivo NathanielGuerrier LaKishaOdlum John Fanning Wendy Chatman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/AP Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Buffy Davis AaraMenzi n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/SLT Chair/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Student Member/student Member/Teacher Member/teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our goal is for each student to graduate from the School of the Future with a sense of social and academic responsibility that will allow them to pursue their goals. We value and support self-sufficiency and participation in cooperative learning and have a commitment to student-centered, apprenticeship based learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School of the Future is a college preparatory school that offers rigorous academics geared toward college and career expectations. Many aspects of our program offer a unique and deeply connected student experience, including an average class size of twenty-seven; the prioritization of critical and creative thinking; strong teacher collaboration; a diverse, integrated student body; and the ability to see and know our students well as learners and individuals. Students are afforded many special opportunities that expose them to the richness of the world beyond traditional school. Examples include internships, a strong art and theater program, an expanded music program, a computer science program, competitive sports, courses at local colleges, advanced placement courses, foreign exchange trips, and frequent field trips, including trips to other US cities. The SOF Community is a diverse one with students coming from different backgrounds socio-economically, culturally and ethnically. It is a true demographic of New York City and thus we try to collaborate with outside organizations that can support and enrich our unique student body. Partnerships such the Children's Museum of the Arts work with MS and 9th grade, The Moth storytelling series works with the High School 11th and 12th graders are two examples of partnerships that work. SOF also has an after school program run by Manhattan Youth for Middle School students School of the Future values assessment that reflects authentic college and career expectations. Our guiding principle when designing curriculum and assessments for our students is that students should be grappling with ideas and skills that matter to their futures. So, we value research, argumentative speaking and writing, teamwork, personal reflection, problem solving, and innovative thinking. These values are reflected in assignments and projects the students complete. Rarely will you find a SOF classroom where students are passively listening to a lecture. If there is lecture, it is explicitly positioned as content to be leveraged in a research oriented project within the unit. Instead, our classrooms brim constantly with dynamic learning and thinking. In place of the traditional Regents Exams as a graduation requirement, our high school students must complete four exhibitions. These are independent research papers culminating in a paper that is presented to a panel of students, teachers, and parents. Our alumni always note that exhibitions prepare them for college writing. Similarly, eighth-grade students have to complete a smaller scale research book about a topic that fascinates them, and then teach it to sixth and seventh graders. We are constantly drilling down our approach to support our struggling students. We look at scheduling, personnel configurations, our repertoire of assessments and integration of Tier II and II interventions. To this end, our goals for the last few years have partly been around strengthening our Special Education Department and our approach to ICT instruction. We have fortified a strong program, and feel good about our Tier I and Tier II supports This year, we want to broaden or expertise with Tier III intervention, integrating well researched online supports as well as more targeted pull outs and more strategic use of personnel. We are piloting efforts this summer with a Middle School enrichment program for 25 struggling students. We also want to concretize student ownership of personalized, helpful strategies they can leverage in their work from year to year through a 'Digital Backpack' initiative. In addition to our focus on Special Education, a salient goal of ours over the last four years has been 'Student Metacognition and Empowerment'. Under the umbrella of this goal, we have focused on student notebooks, choice driven projects, our craft around classroom discourse, as well as expanding our program offerings, especially for 2018-19 CEP 10  Senior Institute students. We want to refine our focus under this umbrella for the 2018-2019 year and examine our inquiry based research and engineering projects to strike the best balance between the demands of teacher managed content fidelity and authentic student inquiry and choice in an effort to operationalize, spiral and concretize curriculum and teacher methods. Last year, we began to build a Restorative Justice Infrastructure at SOF with a focus on weekly circles in grades 6-10 and continuing our 11th and 12th grade Restorative Justice panels. This year, we want to deepen our approach to circles with more fluid and teacher generated discussion structures to ground weekly circles. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education students including physically disabled students, one in wheel chair as well as students with academic and social emotional disabilities requiring an IEP. The needs of the Special Education students, who are 26% of our population, above the city average, include students with executive functioning and organizational issues, gaps in reading comprehension and multisyllabic decoding, gaps in basic math skills as well as math reasoning. In some cases students have emotional and social difficulties, including oppositional defiant disorder, anxiety and depressive disorders, attention deficit disorders and difficulties in ascertaining social clues to help foster healthy peer relationships. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School of the Future made the most progress according to the Framework for Great Schools over the past year in Family and Community Ties. Our key areas of focus this year are deepening our Restorative Justice program, refining our engineering and research projects, especially our school wide PBATS and Exhibitions, and strengthening our repertoire of supports for our struggling students. These initiatives tie in aspects of the Framework for Great Schools - Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family and Community Ties and Trust. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M413 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 750 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 16 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 139 105 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 39.0% % Attendance Rate 36.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 26.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 36.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.1 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 68.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 0% 98.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 110 110 10 94.9% 2.3% 20.9% 11.1% 17.1% 9.1% 2 19% 6.2 66.4% 78% 5% 0% 98.9% N/A N/A No No N/A YES YES N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction is consistently one of out highest marks in our survey, being between 4.26 and 4.31 for the last three years. Furthermore, in 2018 our High School Impact and Performance indicators fell in the High Impact and High Performance Quadrant buoyed by 93% College Readiness Index in 2018. However, we also saw a slight drop in this area on the 2018 School Survey, from 4.3 to 4.26. Internal data also shows a trend of mediocrity on graduation PBATS. Last year's spring Exhibition results showed that 45% of Juniors and 42% of Seniors received Competent scores as opposed to Good or Outstanding Scores. Finally, despite offering four AP classes and considering we have focused on common core alignment, vertical and horizontal spiraling and backwards planning, only 47% of students report feeling challenged in their classes. Upon reflection with teachers and students where we considered the criteria and spirit of graduation PBATS, we decided to dig into our research and engineering projects, aiming to scale and strengthen them. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of School of the Future students will complete at least two research projects and two engineering projects and the percentage of school wide PBATs rated Competent (rather than Good or Outstanding) will go from an average of 43% to 35%. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue our work with the Knowles Teacher Initiative to support Engineering Projects in Math and Science Teachers will identify two research and/or engineering projects on their curriculum maps to be reviewed by department heads, admin and coach. Our high school teachers will meet bimonthy to look at student Exhibition work and plan lessons, approaches and supports for Exhibition Advisory. All High School teachers Special Education teachers will refine their approaches to supporting their students in Inquiry based engineering and research projects. Special Education teachers Math and Science teachers 4 to 6 times a year All teachers Between Instructional Coach Instructional Coach, Department Heads Principal, Assistant Principal, Exhibition Coordinator and Instructional Coach Instructional Coach and Special Education Department Chairs September and end of October bi monthly exhibition planning meetings Weekly PD and coaching sessions; monthly department meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will introduce our curriculum maps, highlighting the above projects at our Back to School night in September. We will show exemplar projects at Family conferences and upload supporting and explanatory documents to pupilpath to which all parents have access. Furthermore, each grade level Learning Specialist will meet with parents three times a year by phone or in person outside the IEP designated times to make sure parents know their child's IEP and how their child is progressing with the IEP goals. Meetings will be documented by the learning specialists and include the subject specific general Education teacher twice a year at Family Conferences. The Exhibition Coordinator will reach out to families of students flagged during PBAT rough draft windows to develop action plans. Teachers will also reach out to families bimonthly around student progress in Exhibitions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will contract with the Knowles Teacher Initiative. We will also need subs for the times we pull teachers from classes for pd every six weeks. We will send teachers to trainings that support their management of research and engineering. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will be halfway towards this goal, with all students completing one research and one engineering project. Our Fall Exhibition data will show a decrease to 35% Competent scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Unit Plans, teacher and student surveys, Exhibition and Department meeting minutes, parent call logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our Supportive Environment Scores are 4.1 and 96% of students say they feel safe in classes, 83% saying they feel safe in the hallways and bathrooms. Overall, we have a safe and positive school environment. While most of the bullying questions are over 70% positive, only 57% of the students reported that bullying never happens at school. In the past when students broke school rules the Dean, Principal or Assistant Principal meted out consequences according to the City-Wide Standards of Intervention and Discipline Measures. The consequences were appropriate to the infraction and students were sometimes counseled after the consequence but it seemed very top down and students felt their voices were not being heard. School of the Future has always been proud of ensuring student voices are heard in the classroom now we want to make sure their voices are heard outside of the classroom as well. In order to engender a more value based, reflective and empathetic school culture, last year, we launched a School wide Restorative Justice program and will continue to focus on strengthening the program this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 85% of teachers in grades 6-10 will report confidence in implementing weekly circles in a google form reflection. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Members of the Restorative Justice Committee will revise circle curriculum to reflect the goal of topic based skeletal conversation outlines grounded in visual or quote based openers and guided questions. The Restorative Justice Committee will meet monthly to monitor circle implementation. We will dedicate monthly Monday PD sessions for grade level circle planning. The School Dean will facilitate a Senior Institute Restorative Justice class who hold harm circles for the lower grades. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Interested teachers 6/2018-8/2018 School Dean School Dean School Dean and RJ Committee members from each team School Dean 9/2018- 6/2019 9/2019- 6/2018 9/2018-6/2019 RJ Committee members 6th grade-10th grade teachers School Dean and interested 11th and 12th grade students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Dean will send a Circle overview to all families as well as review the curriculum with all 6-10 parents at Back to School Night. When appropriate, families will participate in harm circles. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Persession for summer circle planning Persession for Restorative Justice Committee Members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. BY February 2019, 70% of teachers will report confidence with circle implementation on the way to our year end goal of 85%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers has been one of our highest data points on the School Survey along with Rigorous Instruction. For the last three years, our scores are between 4.61 and 4.24. in 2018, 95% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. However, in 2018 only 74% of teachers said their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. We discussed this during our SBO negotiations and decided to prune some PD and meeting structures to allow teachers to have more time to collaborate around the school initiatives of Restorative Justice, Tier I supports and improved PBATs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the June 2019 School Survey, 80% of teachers will say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Special Education teachers will use new training in Rewards, Orton Gilingham, and Hochman method, as well as Imagine Math to plan their work with a targeted group of students in a Tier I/SETSS capacity 1x a week for a 6-8 week cycles. Our SBO negotiated bimonthly Monday PD sessions will toggle between Department Time to work on High School Exhibitions and Middle School Engineering and Research Projects and time for planning Circles Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students identified through formative assessments as having similar skills gaps. All teachers and all students Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Math and Science teachers Sept 2018-Sept 2019 Special Education Teachers, supported by Administration and Instructional Coach Administration, Department Heads, Exhibition Coordinator, Dean, Instructional Coach Math and Science Departments will work together with the Knowles Organization to collaboratively plan projects and will continue their work in Department Meetings Instructional Coach and Math and Science Department Heads 2018-19 CEP 20  With guidance from the Instructional Coach, All General Education teachers and Special Education teachers will continue to meet weekly and Middle School Humanities teams will continue to meet weekly. We will send teachers together to outside professional development including Academy for Teachers, Affinity workshops, Facing History workshops, Teachers College, MfA and workshops at museums as well as out of city NCTE, NSTA, NCTM and Social Studies Conferences. We will hold Pupil Personnel Team Meetings every six weeks to create RTI based action plans for students that each grade deems in need of collective inquiry. Sept 2018-June 2019 Instructional Coach and all teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Instructional Coach and Department Heads Administration All teachers All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, administration, guidance, SBST team, and related service providers will be present. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents of ICT students will meet three times a year regarding progress of special education students. In addition students receiving SETSS/targeted support will receive frequent email communication from teachers and service providers. Guidance teams and grade level team leaders ensure that all students in danger of failing come to parent teacher conferences and initiate conversations around best practices for supporting students at home. Finally, the Guidance Department and the Parent Coordinator will work with our PA to hold workshops for how to help your child with work and how to understand pupilpath. 11th and 12th grade families of students struggling with exhibitions will be contacted by sponsors bimonthly. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Imagine Math licenses, KNOWLES PD, REWARDS and DIBELS training, Central DOE progress monitoring training, Judith Hochman strategies and other in a nd out of city professional development. We also need subs to allow for some in house PD and planning sessions. Some students will have modified schedules for Related Services and other academic supports. Teachers who teach reading and math support outside of their contractual periods will receive persession. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 there will be 70% of teachers will say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas on a google survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 93% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning according to the 2018 School Survey and our feedback from parents around Inclusive Leadership is between 87% and 93% from 2018. In our last Quality Review, which was in the 2014-2015 school year, we received a Well Developed in indicator 3.4 - 'how clearly are high expectations communicated to students and staff'. These data points indicate the Principal's strong instructional leadership. However, as a 6-12 school with many different needs and with an experienced and established teaching force, it can be difficult to cohere around an urgent vision. In fact, in 2018 only 67% of the staff expressed that the Principal shares a strong vision for the school. This reflects a different lens than the 93% positive feedback around high standards for student learning and suggests the need to tighten and crystallize our messaging and infrastructure around executing certain initiatives. To that end, we are concretizing systems and structures that support our school vision. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the June 2019 School Survey period, 70% of teachers will express that the Principal shares a strong vision for the school. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration revises and resurfaces parts of the SOF teacher handbook that reflect lax and uneven systems that undermine our vision including grading and late work policies, cell phone policies, attendance policies and hallway supervision. Administration conducts four grade book 'walkthroughs' a year and two Co-teaching 'walkthroughs' a year in order to surface trends in strong and weak practice in implementing articulated. expectations. We will give macro and micro feedback. Administration and Dean will meet weekly to review bathroom logs and cut reports in order to surface students with whom we should intervene as well as to identify systems that need attention. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 6/2018 - Administration 6/2019 All teachers, 9/2018-6/2019 Administration All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration and Dean Team leaders who make up the SOF Cabinet will lead a year long process of SOF Values Calibration. We will survey the staff with questions around our shared philosophies, consolidate answers into buckets of values and then repeat this process with students and parents to shape a Values statement that reflects the current beliefs of the SOF community The larger SOF community 2/2018-6/2019 Administration and Cabinet. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Individual families and the SLT will participate in surveys and focus groups around the revision of SOF's values. Also, as a result of more consistent systems, we will be in contact with more parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Persession for Cabinet members and refreshments for focus groups. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, we will have a draft of SOF values to start workshopping and revising with students and parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Bathroom logs, cut reports and the status of the SOF Values document. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We improved from 2.92 to 3.44 in the Framework of Strong Family and Community Ties. 87% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. We attribute this mostly to 100% participation in Family Conferences in 6th grade through 10th grade, our quarterly action plan windows and more frequent and accessible family newsletters. We do have a fairly static group of students, around 20%, who are consistently danger of failing one or more core class and who demonstrate poor work habits and resilience. We have often reflected that if we were able to more effectively engage families to interrupt poor school performance in addition to our many in school supports and interventions, that perhaps we could move this 20%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the amount of failing students will decrease by 10% compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers spend bimonthly team meetings calling and emailing parents of students who are struggling academically or emotionally. Specifically, four times a year at the mid point of each quarter, we look at the students earning below a 72 in each class and devise action plans, including contacting families. They will log this contact. Action plans also include SGI, Reading and Math support as well as other interventions we shape to response to needs of individual students. Lead by our counseling department, our counseling interns will launch an an and offline parent to parent support group where parents can share parenting tips around things like structuring and helping with homework, cell phones, and social media. We will identify a list of high need students in order to reach out especially to these families to participate. Parent/Family coordinator sends out weekly e-bulletins. Parent Coordinator will offer ongoing workshops on Skedula, our online grading system. Three times a year Parent teacher conferences are held on more than one day. All parents Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of struggling students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Team leaders and Administration All parents, especially the families of students struggling with work habits. All parents 12/018 - 6/2-2019 Principal and Guidance Department Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator and Administration Sept.2018-May 2019 Three time a year Family Conferences in November, February and April with evening and daytime lots across the week. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. College Access for All; Manhattan Youth After School Program 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for team leaders, Monthly webmaster, persession for extra parent conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our semester grades will indicate a 5% decrease in danger of failing compared to our June 2018 data, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family contact logs; pupilpath grades Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades, Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment, PBATs Mathematics Grades, Math PBATs (Task on Demands), exit cards, quizzes and projects When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day (lunch) and after school During the school day (lunch) and after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted reading instruction: Guided reading groups, Hochmanwriting instruction, Rewards and Orton Gillingham instruction for decoding, Jots, essay writing, text based discussion Practicing procedural math, Imagine Math software intervention, Math study groups with teachers Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction, Reading intervention class grades 6-10, Peer tutoring, conferring in class 6-12. Exhibition Advisorysupport 11th and 12th 25 incoming 6th through 8th grade students will participate in a month long summer enrichment program targetinggaps in ELA. Small Group Instruction, Peer tutoring, conferring in class 6-12;Exhibition Advisorysupport 11th and 12th 25 incoming 6th through 8th grade students will participate in a month long summer enrichment program 2018-19 CEP 29  Science Social Studies Grades, PBATs (Task on Demands), Labs, exit cards, quizzes and projects Modeling Labs, Content Vocabulary, Graphic organizers, proper note taking Grades,PBATs (Task on Demands), Unit Diagnostics, exit cards, quizzes and projects Modeling Discussion, Content Vocabulary, Graphic organizers, proper note taking, multimedia sources At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referrals, family meetings, Grades, OORs reports Counseling both individual and family; weekly meeting with Psychology extern; At-risk testing; IEP evaluations; SETSSperiods targetinggaps in ELA and Math Small Group Instruction, Peer tutoring, conferring in class 6-12;Exhibition Advisorysupport 11th and 12th Small Group Instruction, Peer tutoring, conferring in class 6-12;Exhibition Advisorysupport 11th and 12th Small Group Instruction, Peer tutoring, conferring in class 6-12 During the school day (lunch) and after school During the school day (lunch) and after school During the school day (lunch) 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. not a Title 1 school not a title one school Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 33 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31 Per session for guidance staff outside of their contracted hours, school supplies (school supplies, glasses, winter jackets, Per session for after school academic intervention services; online make up courses 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 16,000 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not a Title 1 school 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not a TA school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not a TA school 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not a preschool 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Each Teacher chooses how many times they would like to be evaluated based on their previous years rating. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 34  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. School of the Future High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students School of the Future High School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child's progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school's Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school's Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school's Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school's Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school's Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents' capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school's Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school's educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   2018-19 CEP 37   conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children's progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School of the Future High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child's achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school's Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child's education; 2018-19 CEP 38   providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child's teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child's class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child's progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department's General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child's attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child's education; volunteer in my child's school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 39   communicate with my child's teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school's Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn.         2018-19 CEP 40  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name School of the Future Borough Manhattan School Number 413 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stacy Goldstein Assistant Principal John Fanning Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Speech provider: Whitney Shmut Superintendent Cathy Pelles Parent Parent Coordinator Jaimee Rutman Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 41  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 748 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.74% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the School of the Future, Fountas and Pinnell is used to guide our instructional planning for ELLs. In addition, we use argument based PBATs (Performance Based Assessment Tasks) three times a year (in all core subjects) --which are normed to Teachers College rubrics. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a data team which convenes three times a year to carefully analyze the results of our assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 42  Exhibitions, which are also argument based, are the summative assessments we use to track growth and identify and inform us of student needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The School of the Future has Intervention team meetings at every grade level; there is also an RtI committee which meets to inform ESL reading intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based upon data gathered from the NYSESLAT, the School of the Future has determined that writing is the area of most challenge for our ELLs. across the board. Therefore, various writing supports have been put into place to strengthen our ELLS in this particular modality. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We meet in teams for RtI and on the department level to disseminate these findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At the School of the Future, we program ELLS to be grouped together as much as possible, in that they travel within the same section. In our initial RtI meeting, all service providers are carefully matched to students based upon our data. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We ensure that the appropriate number of ENL instructional minutes are provided to our ELLs based upon their NYSESLAT scores. The majority of our ELLS are in the Expanding category and only two of our students are in the Transitioning category. For both middle and high school, ELLs. are programmed to receive a total of 180 minutes a week of ENL instruction. The 180 minutes are within an integrated program of ENL/ELA and other core subjects. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 43  Core content is embedded within our curriculum; we implement the Teachers College model for reading and argument writing across the curriculum matrix. Students are always in writing units in history, science, and ELA. Teachers plan together to ensure that there are shared rubrics and classroom charts; homework is argument based, as well. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We use the Home Language Survey (HLS) to evaluate all ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We do not currently have SIFE students at School of the Future. b. We do not currently have Newcomer students at School of the Future c. Developing: for our students who have received ENL services from 4-6 years, we ensure that each student is receiving the number of ENL instructional minutes as determined by their NYSESLAT scores and categories. Reading and writing instruction is embedded in the curriculum as per the Teachers College model; developing students receive support in the way of push-in services in their core subject classes. Writing is stressed across all content areas. (history, science, and ELA) d. Long Term ELLS: Our three Long Term ELLs are also SWDs.. These students receive support in all of their classes across the curriculum in the way of intensified reading and writing. In addition, we have created targeted pull-out groups for these particular students which hone in on the specific skills they need as per their NYSELSAT scores and other data. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ESL teachers and grade level learning specialists meet regularly to create customized and appropriate instructional materials for their shared students. Our RtI teams ensure that a tiered approach to instruction is implemented for all ELLS, but especially for ELLS-SWDs.. Extra attention or a Tier II approach to instruction is prescribed for those particular students who need it. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who are ELLs-SWDs are clustered so as to receive all the instructional supports they need:in both areas, with the least loss of time. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based upon the data gathered and analyzed from the NYSESLAT, teams work together to inform instruction and give students structured reading and writing interventions. In addition, our RtI team meets three times a year to determine which Tier of instruction will fit with which students. We offer both pull-out and push -in services to ELLS in their core classes. The instruction within these models is based upon our RtI determinations. Our push-in model more often implements Tier 1 interventions, whereas the pull-out model is able to give extra attention and is more intensive as per Tier II strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based upon careful analysis of the NYSESLAT, it was determined that writing across content areas was key for all ELLs. The writing instruction is focused mostly on nuance, audience awareness, voice, word choice, word elevation, and syntax. We believe that it is these types of writing skills which separate Transitioning ELLS from Expanding ELLS and Expanding ELLS from Commanding ELLS and therefore, proficiency. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 2018-19 CEP 44  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are programmed into all regular classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our teachers create a variety of visual charts, aids and realia which are customized to meet the needs of our ELLs. In addition, we utilize IXL Math software, Upfront Magazine, Newsela, Brain Pop, and Discovery videos. Teachers are always coordinating with related service providers to be on the cutting edge of both technology and support aids which will help our ELLs achieve success and proficiency. . 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ALL ENL instruction is provided in the target language and not in the students' home language. In certain extreme cases, we might assess comprehension skills in the student's home language to try and assess the root of the language issue. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When programming each summer, we ensure that all of our ELLs are clustered appropriately and are matched up with the correct service providers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We invite ELLs to join our Summer Boot Camp which provides support in both reading and math. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The School of the Future offers both Spanish and Mandarin language electives to all students. Mandarin was chosen because of the high ratio of Mandarin and Cantonese speaking students at the school. ELLs who are also SWDs have language waivers. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Special ed, ENL and reading teachers all benefit from our contract with Teachers College. Teachers attend workshops and visiting specialists from Teachers College work with our teachers on site. 2018-19 CEP 45  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Special Ed. and Speech departments meet together for two hours a month to discuss supporting both special ed students and ELLS across the board in all content areas. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We integrate our meetings with the parents of ELLS into our Parent Teacher conferences. We closely monitor our parent responses and based upon that --we resend invitations one month before the actual conferences. This ensures that each parent is doubly notified and results in an extremely high turn-out. We utilize all translation services provided to us when corresponding with all parents of ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All correspondence for all events and programs are translated into the languages of our ELLs to ensure total inclusion on the parent level as well as the student level. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 46 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stacy Paige Goldstein, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 48  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 49  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 50  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 51 
